=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl5221cdelta - what is new for cperl v5.22.1

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes perl-only differences between the perl 5.22.0
release and the cperl 5.22.1 release.

For B<cperl> see F<Changes> and L<perlcperl>

=head1 Core Enhancements

=over 4

=item * coretypes (Int, UInt, Num, Str. lowercase native types accepted)

See L<perltypes>

=item * types in signatures as designed and also as attribute

But still using the slow Zefram signatures, which are 2x slower,
not faster.

=item * function return types declarations as attribute

Every function declaration can now carry it's return type as
attribute.  Note that types in user-defined functions are not yet
checked or optimized, only in the internal ops.

    sub myfunc(Int $a):Int { $a + 1 }

guarantees that the result will not overflow to Num.

=item * new :pure function attributes

to mark purely functional, side-effect free functions as such.  These
functions can be optimized easier later-on, e.g. with inlining or
memoization.

=item * shaped arrays with compile-time checks and optims

Parse a size argument for arrays, like

    my @a[20]; my Int @b[5];

and pre-initialize them with the zero-value of the type, undef if
untyped. This size may not be changed later.  Forbid and compile-time
and run-time check forbidden size changes, like push, pop, shift,
unshift on them. Enable faster accessor, which donot have to check the
index if out of bounds.  Native types int, uint, num, str are parsed
but not yet used as array elements. Multidimensional shaped arrays are not
supported nor optimized.

=item * static loop optims

Optimize loops with static arylen to use the new unchecked array element
accessors.

    for (0..$#a) { $a[$_] }

=item * fast arithmetic overflow

With gcc-5 or clang-3.4 on 64bit new fast compiler intrinsics are used
for the add and multiply ops, which check just for the overflow flag
and then jump to the promotion to double. This results in smaller and
much faster code. The old code which had to compute the results twice,
and needed many more branches before to check for IV to UV or NV
promotion.

=item * convert static method to subs

Convert static method calls to subs, as described in
L<http://blogs.perl.org/users/rurban/2011/06/how-perl-calls-subs-and-methods.html>

Only 4% faster.

=item * strict, attributes, DynaLoader, XSLoader as builtin packages, rewritten in C

=item * changed default hash function to the fastest FNV1A

As in the stableperl fork. See L<https://github.com/rurban/smhasher#smhasher> and
L<https://github.com/rurban/perl-hash-stats#perl-hash-stats>

Added more hash functions to test them: FNV1A,
FNV1A_YOSHIMITSUTRIAD/FNV1A_YT, CRC32, METRO64CRC, METRO64, SPOOKY32
In the end the statistically slightly worse and slower FNV1A was the fastest
when used in a hash table function. For file or database digests other hash
functions are better.

Allow Configure -Dhash_func=name

=item * new enterxsssub OP

Seperate XS and PP XS calls dynamically with a new enterxssub op.
12.5% faster, even when lot of XS loaded functions initially start as PP op,
and are restarted as XS op.

=item * -DI and -Dk

DEBUG_k: -Dk for compiler checks and optimizations, also -Dkv.

DEBUG_I: -DI replaces now PERLIO_DEBUG.

DEBUG_H: -DH is now extended to report more.

=item * add some unicode ops

With utf8 and use 5.22 or -E some new unicode ops are now understood:

Parse constant unicode superscripts, grouped into max 2 digits:

    2²⁵  => 2**25
    2⁰²⁵ => (2**02)**5
    $a³ => $a ** 3

And

    → ⇒
    ⇔ ≠ ≤ ≥ ÷

as shorter to read and harder to write aliases for:

    ARROW -> and FATARROW =>
    NCMP <=>
    NE,LE,GE !=,<=,>=
    DIVIDE /

=item * improved build system

make -s is now more silent, and thus much faster.

CC is now used for compiling and LD for linking. This enables now
seperate linkers to be used, esp. gold linkers or LLVM optimizations.

=item * extended dump and Devel::Peek

All SV FLAGS are now seperated into the general sv_flags and type specific
cv,hv,av flags, and printed as hex value and as string interpretation.
PADs are printed now with more information.

=back

=head2 Unicode 8.0 is now supported

For details on what is in this release, see
L<http://www.unicode.org/versions/Unicode8.0.0/>.

=head1 Incompatible Changes

=head2 exceptions for i_modulo and i_divide with constants

Re-instate pre-2002 exceptions for i_modulo and i_divide with constants
and typed integers, as with use integer.

[CHANGE] constant integer modulo now behaves as under use integer
and deviates with one negative argument from post-2002 code.

=head2 integer constants behave now as under use integer

Provide upgrade exceptions with the u_ suffix for u_add and u_multiply
to allow promotion from signed integers to unsigned.  But results of
arithmetic operations with only integer constants are not promoted to
double numbers anymore.

=head2 The C</\C/> character class has been removed.

This regular expression character class was deprecated in v5.20.0 and has
produced a deprecation warning since v5.22.0. It is now a compile-time
error. If you need to examine the individual bytes that make up a
UTF8-encoded character, then use C<utf8::encode()> on the string (or a
copy) first.

=head2 C<chdir('')> no longer chdirs home

Using C<chdir('')> or C<chdir(undef)> to chdir home has been deprecated since
perl v5.8, and will now fail.  Use C<chdir()> instead.

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item * strict, attributes, DynaLoader, XSLoader as builtin packages

Those packages are now builtins, and were rewritten in C for performance
and memory reasons.

=item * Config as XS

Config is now a XS extension, implemented as perfect hash leading to
dramatic memory savings. See L<http://perl11.org/cperl/STATUS.html>

=item * Safe

Safe was improved to skip loading empty Carp::Heavy, and to add many
missing tests.

=item *

The libnet distribution has been upgraded from version 3.05 to 3.06.

=item *

The Scalar-List-Utils distribution has been upgraded from version 1.41 to 1.42.

=item *

L<autodie> has been upgraded from version 2.26 to 2.27.

=item *

L<CPAN::Meta> has been upgraded from version 2.150001 to 2.150005.

=item *

L<CPAN::Meta::Requirements> has been upgraded from version 2.132 to 2.133.

=item *

L<CPAN::Meta::YAML> has been upgraded from version 0.012 to 0.016.

=item *

L<Encode> has been upgraded from version 2.72 to 2.73.

=item *

L<encoding> has been upgraded from version 2.14 to 2.15.

=item *

L<ExtUtils::CBuilder> has been upgraded from version 0.280221 to 0.280223.

=item *

L<feature> has been upgraded from version 1.40 to 1.41.

=item *

L<Getopt::Long> has been upgraded from version 2.45 to 2.46.

=item *

L<HTTP::Tiny> has been upgraded from version 0.054 to 0.056.

=item *

L<List::Util> has been upgraded from version 1.41 to 1.42_01.

=item *

L<Locale::Codes> has been upgraded from version 3.34 to 3.35.

=item *

L<Math::BigInt> has been upgraded from version 1.9997 to 1.999701.

Correct the behaviour of bdiv() and bmod() in list context. [perl #124300]

Correct C<< Math::BigInt->new() >> for non-integer input.  [perl #124325]

Speed up Math::BigFloat -> blog(). [perl #124382]

Fix bug in Math::BigFloat's bceil() and bint() methods. [perl #124412]

=item *

L<Math::BigRat> has been upgraded from version 0.2608 to 0.260801.

Correct the behaviour of bdiv() and bmod() in list context. [perl #124303]

=item *

L<Module::CoreList> has been upgraded from version 5.20150520 to 5.20150620.

=item *

L<Module::Metadata> has been upgraded from version 1.000026 to 1.000027.

=item *

L<parent> has been upgraded from version 0.232 to 0.234.

=item *

L<Parse::CPAN::Meta> has been upgraded from version 1.4414 to 1.4417.

=item *

L<perl5db.pl> has been upgraded from version 1.49 to 1.49_01.

User actions are no longer evaluated after the script under the
debugger finishes.  [perl #71678]

=item *

L<Pod::Simple> has been upgraded from version 3.29 to 3.30.

=item *

L<Pod::Usage> has been upgraded from version 1.64 to 1.67.

=item *

L<POSIX> has been upgraded from version 1.53 to 1.54.

The NaN payload API has been implemented (getpayload, setpayload,
setpayloadsig, issignaling).

=item *

L<Scalar::Util> has been upgraded from version 1.41 to 1.42_01.

=item *

L<Socket> has been upgraded from version 2.018 to 2.019.

=item *

L<threads> has been upgraded from version 2.01 to 2.02.

=item *

L<Time::Piece> has been upgraded from version 1.29 to 1.30.

=item *

L<UNIVERSAL> has been upgraded from version 1.12 to 1.13.

Don't import from L<UNIVERSAL> in its documentation, it no longer
exports anything.  [perl #125410]

=back

=head1 Platform Support

=head2 Platform-Specific Notes

=over 4

=item Win32

=over

=item *

Visual C++ 2013 builds will now execute on XP and higher. Previously they would
only execute on Vista and higher.

=item *

You can now build perl with GNU Make and GCC.  [perl #123440]

=item *

C<truncate($filename, $size)> now works for files over 4GB in size.
[perl #125347]

=back

=back

=head1 Selected Bug Fixes

=over 4

=item * don't fatalize warnings during unwinding

[perl #123398]

=item * Ignore ENOTTY on open via the perlio buffer layer

=item * hash keys keep the tainted info.

See [perlsec](http://perldoc.perl.org/perlsec.html#Taint-mode)

=item * fix ops using lexical $_

This was broken since 2002.

Fixed the old OA_TARGLEX bug with TARGET_MY optimizations.

Tracked down a wrong TARGET_MY optimization on the ucfirst op, where
is illegal to use, because the (PL_opargs[kid->op_type] & OA_TARGLEX
usage in maybe_targlex is wrong.

This was testing for one of both bits TARGET 8 OR TARGLEX 16 thus
always was true for each TARGET t op, like ucfirst, which are not
prepared to use TARGET_MY.

The bug was there from Ilya's first SASSIGN optimization patch on,
which added TARGLEX, but this was using the bit 256 in opargs, which
never caused the bitpattern to match. And where it matched the assert
was removed.
Added now a bittester macro OP_HAS_TARGLEX, because people notoriously
get bit matching with AND or OR wrong.

=item * readonly packages can now be cloned with threads

=item * fixed some crashing cornercases found by the AFL fuzzer or similar:

[perl #125840]: $x=*0; *x=$x  protect from XSRETURN(-1)

[perl #125341]: BEGIN <> (worse fix added upstream)

[perl #125350]: qq{@{[0}*sub{]]}}}=sub{0' . "\c[" (Shlomi Fish, not upstream)

fixed various off-by-one \0 errors with the new 5.16 GV code.

=item *

Duplicating a closed file handle for write no longer creates a
filename of the form F<GLOB(0xXXXXXXXX)>.  [perl #125115]

=item *

Warning fatality is now ignored when rewinding the stack.  This
prevents infinite recursion when the now fatal error also causes
rewinding of the stack.  [perl #123398]

=item * 

In perl v5.22.0, the logic changed when parsing a numeric parameter to the -C
option, such that the successfully parsed number was not saved as the option
value if it parsed to the end of the argument.  [perl #125381]

=item *

The PadlistNAMES macro is an lvalue again.

=item *

Zero -DPERL_TRACE_OPS memory for sub-threads.

perl_clone_using() was missing Zero init of PL_op_exec_cnt[].  This
caused sub-threads in threaded -DPERL_TRACE_OPS builds to spew exceedingly
large op-counts at destruct.  These counts would print %x as "ABABABAB",
clearly a mem-poison value.

=back

=head1 Acknowledgements

Perl 5.22.1c represents approximately 6 months of development since Perl 5.22.0
and contains approximately 86,000 lines of changes across 480 files from 29
authors.

Excluding auto-generated files, documentation and release tools, there were
approximately 55,000 lines of changes to 270 .pm, .t, .c and .h files.

Perl continues to flourish into its third decade thanks to a vibrant community
of users and developers. The following people are known to have contributed the
improvements that became Perl 5.22.1c:

Chase Whitener, Chris 'BinGOs' Williams, Craig A. Berry, Dagfinn Ilmari
Mannsåker, Daniel Dragan, David Golden, David Mitchell, Hugo van der Sanden,
Jan Dubois, Jarkko Hietaniemi, Jerry D. Hedden, Jim Cromie, Karen Etheridge,
Karl Williamson, kmx, Lukas Mai, Martijn Lievaart, Matthew Horsfall, Niko Tyni,
Peter John Acklam, Rafael Garcia-Suarez, Reini Urban, Ricardo Signes, Shlomi
Fish, Steve Hay, Thomas Sibley, Tony Cook, Unicode Consortium, Zefram.

The list above is almost certainly incomplete as it is automatically generated
from version control history. In particular, it does not include the names of
the (very much appreciated) contributors who reported issues to the Perl bug
tracker.

Many of the changes included in this version originated in the CPAN modules
included in Perl's core. We're grateful to the entire CPAN community for
helping Perl to flourish.

For a more complete list of all of Perl's historical contributors, please see
the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source distribution.

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the articles recently
posted to the comp.lang.perl.misc newsgroup and the perl bug database at
https://rt.perl.org/ .  There may also be information at
http://www.perl.org/ , the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please run the C<perlbug> program
included with your release.  Be sure to trim your bug down to a tiny but
sufficient test case.  Your bug report, along with the output of C<perl -V>,
will be sent off to perlbug@perl.org to be analysed by the Perl porting team.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications, which make it
inappropriate to send to a publicly archived mailing list, then please send it
to perl5-security-report@perl.org.  This points to a closed subscription
unarchived mailing list, which includes all the core committers, who will be
able to help assess the impact of issues, figure out a resolution, and help
co-ordinate the release of patches to mitigate or fix the problem across all
platforms on which Perl is supported.  Please only use this address for
security issues in the Perl core, not for modules independently distributed on
CPAN.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
