=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

[ this is a template for a new perldelta file.  Any text flagged as XXX needs
to be processed before release. ]

perldelta - what is new for perl v5.27.7

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.27.6 release and the 5.27.7
release.

If you are upgrading from an earlier release such as 5.27.5, first read
L<perl5276delta>, which describes differences between 5.27.5 and 5.27.6.

=head1 Notice

XXX Any important notices here

=head1 Core Enhancements

XXX New core language features go here.  Summarize user-visible core language
enhancements.  Particularly prominent performance optimisations could go
here, but most should go in the L</Performance Enhancements> section.

[ List each enhancement as a =head2 entry ]

=head2  The C<sprintf> C<%j> format size modifier is now available with
pre-C99 compilers

The actual size used depends on the platform, so remains unportable.

=head2 Mixed Unicode scripts are now detectable

A mixture of scripts, such as Cyrillic and Latin, in a string is often
the sign of a spoofing attack.  A new regular expression construct
now allows for easy detection of these.  For example, you can say

 qr/(?script_run: \d+ \b )/x

And the digits matched will all be from the same set of 10.  You won't
get a look-alike digit from a different script that has a different
value than what it appears to be.

=head2 New read-only predefined variable C<${^SAFE_LOCALES}>

This variable is 1 if the Perl interpreter is operating in an
environment where it is safe to use and change locales (see
L<perllocale>.)  Currently this is true only when the perl is
unthreaded.

=head2 Script runs now are specified with a different syntax

This isn't really an enhancement, but is being put in this category
because it changes an enhancement from 5.27.8, and there is a new
abbreviated form for it.  The syntax is now either of:

 (*script_run:...)
 (*sr:...)

Previously a C<"+"> was used instead of the C<"*">.

=head2 There is a new form for script runs which combines with
C<(?E<gt>...)> (or C<*atomic:...)>)

C<(*asr:...> is an easier way to write C<(*sr:(?E<gt>...))>,
which is expected to be a commonly used idiom.
C<(*atomic_script_run:...> is also available.  See
L<perlre/Script Runs>.

=head2 Experimentally, there are now alphabetic synonyms for some
regular expression assertions

If you find it difficult to remember how to write certain of the pattern
assertions, there are now alphabetic synonyms.

 CURRENT                NEW SYNONYMS
 ------                 ------------
 (?=...)        (*pla:...) or (*positive_lookahead:...)
 (?!...)        (*nla:...) or (*negative_lookahead:...)
 (?<=...)       (*plb:...) or (*positive_lookbehind:...)
 (?<!...)       (*nlb:...) or (*negative_lookbehind:...)
 (?>...)        (*atomic:...)

These are considered experimental, so using any of these will raise
(unless turned off) a warning in the C<experimental::alpha_assertions>
category.

=head1 Security

XXX Any security-related notices go here.  In particular, any security
vulnerabilities closed should be noted here rather than in the
L</Selected Bug Fixes> section.

[ List each security issue as a =head2 entry ]

=head1 Incompatible Changes

XXX For a release on a stable branch, this section aspires to be:

    There are no changes intentionally incompatible with 5.XXX.XXX
    If any exist, they are bugs, and we request that you submit a
    report.  See L</Reporting Bugs> below.

[ List each incompatible change as a =head2 entry ]

=head2 Over-radix digits in floating point literals

Octal and binary floating point literals used to permit any hexadecimal
digit to appear after the radix point.  The digits are now restricted
to those appropriate for the radix, as digits before the radix point
always were.

=head2 Return type of C<unpackstring()>

The return types of the C API functions C<unpackstring()> and
C<unpack_str()> have changed from C<I32> to C<SSize_t>, in order to
accommodate datasets of more than two billion items.

=head1 Deprecations

XXX Any deprecated features, syntax, modules etc. should be listed here.

=head2 Assignment to C<$[> will be fatal in Perl 5.30

Assigning a non-zero value to L<C<$[>|perlvar/$[> has been deprecated
since Perl 5.12, but was never given a deadline for removal.  This has
now been scheduled for Perl 5.30.

=head2 Module removals

XXX Remove this section if not applicable.

The following modules will be removed from the core distribution in a
future release, and will at that time need to be installed from CPAN.
Distributions on CPAN which require these modules will need to list them as
prerequisites.

The core versions of these modules will now issue C<"deprecated">-category
warnings to alert you to this fact.  To silence these deprecation warnings,
install the modules in question from CPAN.

Note that these are (with rare exceptions) fine modules that you are encouraged
to continue to use.  Their disinclusion from core primarily hinges on their
necessity to bootstrapping a fully functional, CPAN-capable Perl installation,
not usually on concerns over their design.

=over

=item L<Locale::Codes> and its associated Country, Currency and Language modules

XXX Note that deprecated modules should be listed here even if they are listed
as an updated module in the L</Modules and Pragmata> section.

=back

[ List each other deprecation as a =head2 entry ]

=head1 Deprecations

=head2 Use of code points over 0xFF in string bitwise operators

Some uses of these already are illegal after a previous deprecation
cycle.  This deprecates the remaining uses.  See L<perldeprecation>.

=head2 Use of unescaped C<"{"> immediately after a C<"(">

Using unescaped left braces is officially deprecated everywhere, but it
is not enforced in contexts where their use does not interfere with
expected extensions to the language.  A deprecation is added in this
release when the brace appears immediately after an opening parenthesis.
Before this, even if the brace was part of a legal quantifier, it was
not interpreted as such, but as the literal characters, unlike other
quantifiers that follow a C<"("> which are considered errors.  Now,
their use will raise a deprecation message, unless turned off.

=head1 Performance Enhancements

XXX Changes which enhance performance without changing behaviour go here.
There may well be none in a stable release.

[ List each enhancement as an =item entry ]

=over 4

=item *

XXX

=back

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

XXX All changes to installed files in F<cpan/>, F<dist/>, F<ext/> and F<lib/>
go here.  If Module::CoreList is updated, generate an initial draft of the
following sections using F<Porting/corelist-perldelta.pl>.  A paragraph summary
for important changes should then be added by hand.  In an ideal world,
dual-life modules would have a F<Changes> file that could be cribbed.

The list of new and updated modules is modified automatically as part of
preparing a Perl release, so the only reason to manually add entries here is if
you're summarising the important changes in the module update. (Also, if the
manually-added details don't match the automatically-generated ones, the
release manager will have to investigate the situation carefully.)

[ Within each section, list entries as an =item entry ]

=head2 New Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

XXX Remove this section if not applicable.

=back

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

L<Locale::Codes> has been upgraded from version 3.54 to 3.55

B<NOTE>: L<Locale::Codes> is deprecated in core and will be removed
from Perl 5.30.

=item *

L<threads> has been upgraded from version 2.19 to 2.20.
The documentation now better describes the problems that arise when
returning values from threads, and no longer warns about creating threads
in C<BEGIN> blocks.  [perl #96538]

=item *

L<Data::Dumper> has been upgraded from version 2.167_02 to 2.169.
Quoting of glob names now obeys the Useqq option [perl #119831].
Attempts to set an option to C<undef> through a combined getter/setter
method are no longer mistaken for getter calls [perl #113090].

=item *

L<Pod::Html> has been upgraded from version 1.2203 to 1.23.
A title for the HTML document will now be automatically generated by
default from a "NAME" section in the POD document, as it used to be
before the module was rewritten to use L<Pod::Simple::XHTML> to do the
core of its job.  [perl #110520]

=item *

L<GDBM_File> has been upgraded from version 1.16 to 1.17.
Its documentation now explains that C<each> and C<delete> don't mix in
hashes tied to this module [perl #117449].
It will now retry opening with an acceptable block size if asking gdbm
to default the block size failed [perl #119623].

=item *

L<Unicode::UCD> has been upgraded from version 0.69 to 0.70.

The function C<num> now accepts an optional parameter to help in
diagnosing error returns.

=back

=head2 Removed Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

XXX

=back

=head1 Documentation

XXX Changes to files in F<pod/> go here.  Consider grouping entries by
file and be sure to link to the appropriate page, e.g. L<perlfunc>.

=head2 New Documentation

XXX Changes which create B<new> files in F<pod/> go here.

=head3 L<XXX>

XXX Description of the purpose of the new file here

=head2 Changes to Existing Documentation

We have attempted to update the documentation to reflect the changes
listed in this document.  If you find any we have missed, send email
to L<perlbug@perl.org|mailto:perlbug@perl.org>.

XXX Changes which significantly change existing files in F<pod/> go here.
However, any changes to F<pod/perldiag.pod> should go in the L</Diagnostics>
section.

Additionally, the following selected changes have been made:

=head3 L<perlapi>

The API functions C<perl_parse()>, C<perl_run()>, and C<perl_destruct()>
are now documented comprehensively, where previously the only
documentation was a reference to the L<perlembed> tutorial.

The documentation of C<newGIVENOP()> has been belatedly updated to
account for the removal of lexical C<$_>.

The API functions C<newCONSTSUB()> and C<newCONSTSUB_flags()> are
documented much more comprehensively than before.

=head3 L<perlop>

The general explanation of operator precedence and associativity has
been corrected and clarified.  [perl #127391]

The documentation for the C<\> referencing operator now explains the
unusual context that it supplies to its operand.  [perl #131061]

=head3 L<perlsyn>

The means to disambiguate between code blocks and hash constructors,
already documented in L<perlref>, are now documented in L<perlsyn> too.
[perl #130958]

=head3 L<perlfunc>

There is now a note that warnings generated by built-in functions are
documented in L<perldiag> and L<warnings>.  [perl #116080]

The documentation for the C<exists> operator no longer says that
autovivification behaviour "may be fixed in a future release".
We've determined that we're not going to change the default behaviour.
[perl #127712]

A couple of small details in the documentation for the C<bless> operator
have been clarified.  [perl #124428]

The description of C<@INC> hooks in the documentation for C<require>
has been corrected to say that filter subroutines receive a useless
first argument.  [perl #115754]

The documentation of C<ref> has been rewritten for clarity.

The documentation of C<use> now explains what syntactically qualifies
as a version number for its module version checking feature.

The documentation of C<warn> has been updated to reflect that since Perl
5.14 it has treated complex exception objects in a manner equivalent
to C<die>.  [perl #121372]

The documentation of C<die> and C<warn> has been revised for clarity.

=head3 L<perluniprops>

For each binary table or property, the documentation now includes which
characters in the range C<\x00-\xFF> it matches, as well as a list of
the first few ranges of code points matched above that.

=head3 L<perlobj>

The documentation about C<DESTROY> methods has been corrected, updated,
and revised, especially in regard to how they interact with exceptions.
[perl #122753]

=head3 L<perlsec>

The documentation about set-id scripts has been updated and revised.
[perl #74142]

A section about using C<sudo> to run Perl scripts has been added.

=head3 L<perlembed>

The examples in L<perlembed> have been made more portable in the way
they exit, and the example that gets an exit code from the embedded Perl
interpreter now gets it from the right place.  The examples that pass
a constructed argv to Perl now show the mandatory null C<argv[argc]>.

=head3 L<perldebguts>

The description of the conditions under which C<DB::sub()> will be called
has been clarified.  [perl #131672]

=head3 L<perlintern>

The internal functions C<newXS_len_flags()> and C<newATTRSUB_x()> are
now documented.

=head3 L<perlgit>

The precise rules for identifying C<smoke-me> branches are now stated.

=over 4

=item *

XXX Description of the change here

=back

=head1 Diagnostics

The following additions or changes have been made to diagnostic output,
including warnings and fatal error messages.  For the complete list of
diagnostic messages, see L<perldiag>.

XXX New or changed warnings emitted by the core's C<C> code go here.  Also
include any changes in L<perldiag> that reconcile it to the C<C> code.

=head2 New Diagnostics

XXX Newly added diagnostic messages go under here, separated into New Errors
and New Warnings

=head3 New Errors

=over 4

=item *

L<Can't "goto" into a "given" block|perldiag/"Can't E<quot>gotoE<quot> into a E<quot>givenE<quot> block">

(F) A "goto" statement was executed to jump into the middle of a C<given>
block.  You can't get there from here.  See L<perlfunc/goto>.

=back

=head3 New Warnings

=over 4

=item *

L<Locale '%s' contains (at least) the following characters which have
non-standard meanings: %s  The Perl program will use the standard
meanings|perldiag/"Locale '%s' contains (at least) the following
characters which have non-standard meanings: %s  The Perl program will
use the standard meanings">.

=back

=head2 Changes to Existing Diagnostics

XXX Changes (i.e. rewording) of diagnostic messages go here

=over 4

=item *

XXX Describe change here

=item *

Warnings that a variable or subroutine "masks earlier declaration in same
...", or that an C<our> variable has been redeclared, have been moved to a
new warnings category "shadow".  Previously they were in category "misc".

=back

=head1 Utility Changes

XXX Changes to installed programs such as F<perlbug> and F<xsubpp> go here.
Most of these are built within the directory F<utils>.

[ List utility changes as a =head2 entry for each utility and =item
entries for each change
Use L<XXX> with program names to get proper documentation linking. ]

=head2 L<XXX>

=over 4

=item *

XXX

=back

=head1 Configuration and Compilation

XXX Changes to F<Configure>, F<installperl>, F<installman>, and analogous tools
go here.  Any other changes to the Perl build process should be listed here.
However, any platform-specific changes should be listed in the
L</Platform Support> section, instead.

[ List changes as an =item entry ].

=over 4

=item *

XXX

=back

=head1 Testing

XXX Any significant changes to the testing of a freshly built perl should be
listed here.  Changes which create B<new> files in F<t/> go here as do any
large changes to the testing harness (e.g. when parallel testing was added).
Changes to existing files in F<t/> aren't worth summarizing, although the bugs
that they represent may be covered elsewhere.

XXX If there were no significant test changes, say this:

Tests were added and changed to reflect the other additions and changes
in this release.

XXX If instead there were significant changes, say this:

Tests were added and changed to reflect the other additions and
changes in this release.  Furthermore, these significant changes were
made:

[ List each test improvement as an =item entry ]

=over 4

=item *

XXX

=back

=head1 Platform Support

XXX Any changes to platform support should be listed in the sections below.

[ Within the sections, list each platform as an =item entry with specific
changes as paragraphs below it. ]

=head2 New Platforms

XXX List any platforms that this version of perl compiles on, that previous
versions did not.  These will either be enabled by new files in the F<hints/>
directories, or new subdirectories and F<README> files at the top level of the
source tree.

=over 4

=item XXX-some-platform

XXX

=item VMS

CRTL features can now be set by embedders before invoking Perl by using the
C<decc$feature_set> and C<decc$feature_set_value> functions.  Previously any attempt
to set features after image initialization were ignored.

=back

=head2 Discontinued Platforms

XXX List any platforms that this version of perl no longer compiles on.

=over 4

=item XXX-some-platform

XXX

=back

=head2 Platform-Specific Notes

XXX List any changes for specific platforms.  This could include configuration
and compilation changes or changes in portability/compatibility.  However,
changes within modules for platforms should generally be listed in the
L</Modules and Pragmata> section.

=over 4

=item XXX-some-platform

XXX

=back

=head1 Internal Changes

XXX Changes which affect the interface available to C<XS> code go here.  Other
significant internal changes for future core maintainers should be noted as
well.

=over 4

=item *

XS modules can now automatically get reentrant versions of system
functions on threaded perls.

By saying

 #define PERL_REENTRANT

near the beginning of an C<XS> file, it will be compiled so that
whatever reentrant functions perl knows about on that system will
automatically and invisibly be used instead of the plain, non-reentrant
versions.  For example, if you write C<getpwnam()> in your code, on a
system that has C<pwnam_r()> all calls to the former will be translated
invisibly into the latter.  This does not happen except on threaded
perls, as they aren't needed otherwise.  Be aware that which functions
have reentrant versions varies from system to system.

=item *

The C<PERL_NO_OP_PARENT> build define is no longer supported, which means
that perl is now always built with C<PERL_OP_PARENT> enabled.

=item *

A new compiler C<#define>, C<dTHX_DEBUGGING>. has been added.  This is
useful for XS or C code that only need the thread context because their
debugging statements that get compiled only under C<-DDEBUGGING> need
one.

=item *

A new API function L<perlapi/Perl_setlocale> has been added.

=back

=head1 Selected Bug Fixes

XXX Important bug fixes in the core language are summarized here.  Bug fixes in
files in F<ext/> and F<lib/> are best summarized in L</Modules and Pragmata>.

[ List each fix as an =item entry ]

=over 4

=item *

C<pack> and C<unpack> can now handle repeat counts and lengths that
exceed two billion.  [perl #119367]

=item *

Digits past the radix point in octal and binary floating point literals
now have the correct weight on platforms where a floating point
significand doesn't fit into an integer type.

=item *

C<exit(0)> in a C<UNITCHECK> or C<CHECK> block no longer permits the
main program to run, and C<exit(0)> in a C<BEGIN> block no longer permits
C<INIT> blocks to run before exiting.  [perl #2754]

=item *

The canonical truth value no longer has a spurious special meaning as
a callable.  It used to be a magic placeholder for a missing C<import>
or C<unimport> method.  It is now treated like any other string C<1>.
[perl #126042]

=item *

C<system> now reduces its arguments to strings in the parent process, so
any effects of stringifying them (such as overload methods being called
or warnings being emitted) are visible in the way the program expects.
[perl #121105]

=item *

The C<readpipe()> built-in function now checks at compile time that
it has only one parameter expression, and puts it in scalar context,
thus ensuring that it doesn't corrupt the stack at runtime.  [perl #4574]

=item *

C<sort> now performs correct reference counting when aliasing C<$a> and
C<$b>, thus avoiding premature destruction and leakage of scalars if they
are re-aliased during execution of the sort comparator.  [perl #92264]

=item *

C<reverse> with no operand, reversing C<$_> by default, is no longer in
danger of corrupting the stack.  [perl #132544]

=item *

C<exec>, C<system>, et al are no longer liable to have their argument
lists corrupted by reentrant calls and by magic such as tied scalars.
[perl #129888]

=item *

Perl's own C<malloc> no longer gets confused by attempts to allocate
more than 4 GiB on a 64-bit platform.  [perl #119829]

=back

=head1 Known Problems

XXX Descriptions of platform agnostic bugs we know we can't fix go here.  Any
tests that had to be C<TODO>ed for the release would be noted here.  Unfixed
platform specific bugs also go here.

[ List each fix as an =item entry ]

=over 4

=item *

XXX

=item *

The bugfix for [perl #2754] in Perl 5.27.7 turned out to cause so much
trouble on CPAN [perl #132577] that it is being postponed.  The bug has
been restored, so C<exit(0)> in a C<UNITCHECK> or C<CHECK> block now
once again permits the main program to run, and C<exit(0)> in a C<BEGIN>
block once again permits C<INIT> blocks to run before exiting.  The bug
will be fixed again for Perl 5.30.

=back

=head1 Errata From Previous Releases

=over 4

=item *

XXX Add anything here that we forgot to add, or were mistaken about, in
the perldelta of a previous release.

=back

=head1 Obituary

XXX If any significant core contributor or member of the CPAN community has
died, add a short obituary here.

=head1 Acknowledgements

XXX Generate this with:

  perl Porting/acknowledgements.pl v5.27.6..HEAD

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the perl bug database
at L<https://rt.perl.org/> .  There may also be information at
L<http://www.perl.org/> , the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please run the L<perlbug> program
included with your release.  Be sure to trim your bug down to a tiny but
sufficient test case.  Your bug report, along with the output of C<perl -V>,
will be sent off to perlbug@perl.org to be analysed by the Perl porting team.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications which make it
inappropriate to send to a publicly archived mailing list, then see
L<perlsec/SECURITY VULNERABILITY CONTACT INFORMATION>
for details of how to report the issue.

=head1 Give Thanks

If you wish to thank the Perl 5 Porters for the work we had done in Perl 5,
you can do so by running the C<perlthanks> program:

    perlthanks

This will send an email to the Perl 5 Porters list with your show of thanks.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
