=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl5251cdelta - what is new for cperl v5.25.1

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes perl-only differences between the cperl 5.25.0
release and the cperl 5.25.1 development releases.

=head1 Security

=head2 C<@{ \327 \n }> buffer overflows

Fixed C<@{ \327 \n }> tokenizer failures and heap buffer overflows in
C<sv_vcatpvfn_flags()> with wrong tracking of C<PL_linestr>, the
currently parsed line buffer. This can easily lead to security
relevant exploits.

L<[perl #128951]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128951>

=head2 C<eval "q" . chr(overlarge)> stack overflow

In C<eval "q" . chr(100000000064)> generating the error message
C<Can't find string terminator "XXX"'> was overrunning a local buffer
designed to hold a single utf8 char, since it wasn't allowing for
the C<\0> at the end.

L<[perl #128952]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128952>

=head2 Protect and warn on hash flood DoS

If the collisions for a hash key lookup exceeds 128 tries (i.e. a
linear search in a linked list), this qualifies as a malicious hash
DoS (I<Denial of Service>) attack. Generally maximal 8-10 collisions
appear in normal hash table usage. Every 8th such hash flood attack
performs a C<sleep(2)> to limit the impact.

Detect and protect against it, also call the new C<warn_security("Hash flood")>.

This security scheme is much easier and faster than trying to hide the
random hash seed with randomized iterators and collisions lists, which
cperl doesn't use.

See L</"New Diagnostics">.

=head2 Warn on metasploit CVE-2015-1592

Detection of the destructive attack against Movable-Type, the third
vector only, which tries to delete F<mt-config.cgi> was added to was
added to L<Storable> 3.01c.

Calls C<warn_security("Movable-Type CVE-2015-1592 Storable metasploit
attack")>, but does not protect against it.

=head2 Warn on metasploit reverse shells

Detect the metasploit payload unix/reverse_perl and some existing
variants.  This is just a dumb match at startup against existing
exploits in the wild, but not future variants.  Calls
C<warn_security("metasploit reverse/bind shell payload")>, but do not
protect against it. This warning is thrown even without C<-w>.

Also detects the CVE-2012-1823 reverse/bind shell payload, which is
widely exploited too. The security warning is called "CVE-2012-1823
reverse/bind shell payload".

=head2 syscalls warnings also security

With a warnings 'syscalls' violation, i.e. detecting C<\0> in arguments
to C API syscalls, the new 'security' warnings category overrides the 'syscalls'
category. I.e. the warning is produced by the L<perlapi/warn_security> API,
and to turn it off, you have to turn off both categories.

=head1 Performance Enhancements

=over 4

=item *

Make all padnames not UTF8 per default, only the ones which are really UTF8.
See L</Internal Changes> and L<[cperl #208]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/208>

=item *

Improvements when reading from arrays have been imported from perl5.
C<av_fetch()> uses less branches reading from the end (negative indices),
and a branch checking for freed C<@_> elements has been removed,

=item *

Extract C<hv_common_magical()> to a seperate function.  Extracts
uncommon magical code in hot code to an extra static function to help
keep the icache smaller. Only in rare cases this branch is
taken. I.e filling ENV at startup, or using tied hashes.

Measured 2-15% faster with normal scripts, not using tied hashes.

=item *

Use more C<strEQc>, C<strNEc> macros, when safe to use, i.e. the left
buffer is big enough, now with Address Sanitizer fallbacks.

The new fast buffer comparison macros C<strEQc> and C<strNEc> compare
a full string including the final C<\0>, C<memEQc> and C<memNEc> just
the start of a buffer, with constants strings. Note that valgrind and
Address Sanitizer will complain about out of range access of the left
side of the buffer. To access these buffers however is safe and will
not lead to SIGBUS on stricter platforms.  To prevent valgrind from
warning on this, you may want to define C<-DVALGRIND>, which uses a
safe and slower fallback macro.

=item *

aassign: pre-allocate needed hash size with aassign, similar to
arrays, avoiding run-time hash splits.
e.g. C<my %h = (.. => .., .. => ..)>

This version is 30% faster overall in the L<Mail::SpamAssassin> testsuite
than cperl-5.25.0.

=item *

Pre-extend internal hashes and stashes to avoid unnecessary boot-time hash
splits. C<%warnings::>, C<%Config::>, C<%utf8::>, C<%version::>.

=item *

Added new C<get_svs>, C<get_avs>, C<get_hvs> macros, and accompanied
C<get_[ash]vn_flags> API functions, to omit the run-time C<strlen(name)>
for constant names. (#191)

=back

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item Config::Perl::V  0.27_01

=item CPAN::Meta  2.150010c

And merge F<cpan/Parse-CPAN-Meta> into it. F<cpan/Parse-CPAN-Meta> is
gone.

Parse-CPAN-Meta security: set $YAML::XS::DisableCode, $YAML::XS::DisableBlessed.

Add support for all known YAML and JSON modules: *::Syck, JSON::MaybeXS, Mojo::JSON.
But JSON::Any is broken.

fixed UTF-8 issues, passes now all Test-CPAN-Meta tests.

=item CPAN  2.14c

reapply most of our patches.
skip cperl builtin prereqs.

=item Archive::Tar  2.10

=item Cpanel::JSON::XS  3.0218

New stringify_infnan(3) infnan_mode.
Fix inf/nan detection on HP-UX and others.
Use faster strEQc macros.
Prefer memEQ for systems without memcmp, to use bcmp there.
Add more expect_false() to inf/nan branches.
Fix av and hv length types: protect from security sensitive overflows,
add HVMAX_T and RITER_T
Add new "Hash key too large" error. perl5 silently truncates it,
but we prefer errors.

=item Term::ReadKey 2.37_01

ReadKey.pm renamed to ReadKey_pm.PL,
expand blockoptions specific variants already at installation,
no load-time eval, demand-load Carp, remove unneeded AutoLoader,
harmonize formatting.

patch: use faster StructCopy and fixup the XS.

=item B  1.62_05

Allow a 2nd optional CV argument for B::OP::aux_list,
fixing B::Deparse and thereby Data::Dumper and Test2 is_deeply.

=item Storable  3.01c

L</"Warn on metasploit CVE-2015-1592">

=item Config  6.22

protect sv in END during global destruction, esp. with B::C.
fixes for missing . in @INC (cperl or -Dfortify_inc).

=item YAML::XS  0.75

merged with upstream libyaml 0.1.7
avoid duplicate checks against NULL
fix libyaml clang -Wlogical-op warnings
fix libyaml clang -Wlogical-not-parentheses warnings

fixed encoding issues: fixed wrong $YAML::XS::Encoding and
$YAML::XS::LineBreak comparison logic.
fixed utf8 input as handled as UTF8,
non-utf8 honors $YAML::XS::Encoding.

fixed -Wunused value warnings

merged with upstream YAML-LibYAML,
implemented $DisableBlessed (security).

=item List::Util  1.45_06

sum/min/max need to call SvGETMAGIC

=item Sub::Util  1.45_05

set_subname memory fix by @bluhm from Sub::Name 0.20
[cpan #117072]

Fixes for older perls, esp. lexical $_ support.

Reinstate the &DB::sub setter, but no UTF8 support yet.

=item ExtUtils::Liblist::Kid 8.04_06

one more darwin fix for the wrong no library found warning
for symlinked darwin libSystem.dylib libraries.

=item ExtUtils::MakeMaker 8.04_04

skip cperl builtin prereqs.

=item IO::Socket::IP 0.38

protect sv in END during global destruction, esp. with B::C.
fixes for missing . in @INC (cperl or -Dfortify_inc).

From https://github.com/atoomic/IO-Socket-IP/:

- Support setting custom socket options with new Sockopts
  constructor parameter

- Restore blocking mode after ->connect errors [cpan #112334]

=item Time::HiRes  1.9740

More Darwin thread fixes for clock_gettime,
Sierra support,
test improvements,
skip the t/utime.t on ext2/ext3

=item Socket  2.024_04

Merge cpan 2.024 with our 2.021_02,
plus fix some problems in their new code.

Fixes for OpenBSD: Probe for F<netinet/in_systm.h>
Removed C<i_netinet6_in6> probe.
This was never used due to a typo.
It cannot be used due to RFC 2553.

=item B  1.62_04

use the new get_svs, get_avs, get_hvs macros.

=item Devel::Peek  1.23_02

use the new get_svs, get_avs, get_hvs macros.
The flags where harmonized, missing names were added,
most fields are now print in natural order as in the struct.

=item File::Glob  1.26_01

use the new get_svs, get_avs, get_hvs macros.

=item File::DosGlob  1.12_01

use the new get_svs, get_avs, get_hvs macros.

=item POSIX  1.65_01

use the new get_svs, get_avs, get_hvs macros.

=item PerlIO::encoding  0.24_01

use the new get_svs, get_avs, get_hvs macros.

=item XS::APItest  0.80_02

use the new get_svs, get_avs, get_hvs macros.

=item DynaLoader  2.05c

no mathoms: call_sv instead of call_pv, get_cvs where available.

use the new get_svs, get_avs, get_hvs macros.

=item B-C  1.54_13

Better CopFILE_set,
Fixup arenasize refcnt.
Delay cvref to init2, properly set a SvRV to a XS sub.
Optimize constpv for CvFILE (less constants to merge for gcc).
Improve NV precision by one digit.
Fix to compile in utf8_heavy.pl, abstract and set %INC.
Fix generation of @B::C::Config::deps on Windows.
Fix !C99 precedence bug (e.g. MSVC).
Minor refactor to simplify save_hek.
Use the new get_svs, get_avs, get_hvs macros.
perlcc add --debug|-D
Improve endav XSUB bump
Abstract RITER_T and HVMAX_T for the various sizes, compat HEK_STATIC
Defer REGCOMP for \P{} properties
Change $sv->EXTFLAGS to compflags since 5.22 for CALLREGCOMP().
Turn off MGf_REFCOUNTED.
global-buffer-overflow with dynamic COW strings, wrong savepvn args.

=item Exporter

Exporter remained unchanged. But CORE support for the "used only once"
warnings has been to restricted to the four magic names "EXPORT",
"EXPORT_OK", "EXPORT_FAIL" and "EXPORT_TAGS". Other names starting
with "EXPORT" will now throw the "used only once" warning as all other
symbols.

=item Data::Dumper  1.162

strEQc improvements

fix correct indentation for utf-8 key hash elements, [perl #128524].

=item Devel::PPPort  3.35_01

no changes

=item Digest::SHA  5.96

prevented shasum from possibly running malicious code,
remove '.' from @INC before module loading RT #116513,
namespace cleanup (RT #105371 and #105372),
minor code and documentation tweaks

=item Encode  2.86

=item File::Fetch  2.52

* Set a cleaned env when running git clone
* Changed git repository link in tests
* Removed consistently failing httpbin.org tests
* Require Module::Load::Conditional 0.66
* Fix FTP tests for ipv6

=item Getopt::Long 2.49.1

* RT #114999 fix :number
* RT #113748 fix VersionMessage ignores -output argument
* RT #39052 sanify gnu_getopt

=item HTTP::Tiny  0.070

Many fixes und improvements

=item IPC::Cmd  0.96

set $Module::Load::Conditional::FORCE_SAFE_INC = 1

=item Locale::Codes  3.40

Lot of new codes.

=item Locale::Maketext 1.28

Fix optional runtime load for CVE-2016-1238

Add blacklist and whitelist support, with 
perl #127923 priority. See L<Locale::Maketext/"BRACKET NOTATION SECURITY">

=item Math-BigInt  1.999726

with our t/ skip count fixes.

=item Module-Load-Conditional  0.68

Fix unconditional @INC localisation,
Add FORCE_SAFE_INC option to fix CVE-2016-1238.

=item Module-Metadata  1.000033

- Fix file operation in tests for VMS

- use a more strict matching heuristic when attempting to infer the
  "primary" module name in a parsed .pm file

- only report "main" as the module name if code was seen outside another
  namespace, fixing bad results for pod files (RT#107525)

=item NEXT  0.67

Doc and meta changes only.

=item libnet  3.10

- Remove . from @INC when loading optional modules.  [Tony Cook, Perl
  RT#127834, CVE-2016-1238]

- Increased minimum required version of IO::Socket::IP to 0.25 to hopefully
  stop t/pop3_ipv6.t hanging.  [CPAN RT#104545]

- Debug output now includes decoded (from base64) negotiation for SASL.
  [Philip Prindeville, PR#27]

- plus the suse utf8 fixes for Net::Cmd, see 5bd7010cb and
  our darwin performance fix for hostname.

=item Perl-OSType  1.010

Added msys

=item podlators  4.08

Many Pod::Man bugfixes and new tests,
see L<https://metacpan.org/changes/distribution/podlators>

=item Pod-Perldoc  3.27

Fix broken test on Windows and FreeBSD (RT#116551)
Fix CVE-2016-1238 by temporarily removing '.' from @INC in world writable directories.
Fix =head3 appearing in some perlfunc lookups
AmigaOS patches (RT#106798) (RT#110368)
Fall back to an English perlfunc if translation doesn't exist (RT#104695)
FreeBSD has mandoc too, with UTF-8 support.
-U now documented and implied with -F (RT#87837)

=item Scalar-List-Utils  1.46_06

VERSION bump only to protect from weak upstream.

=item Sys-Syslog  0.35

CVE-2016-1238: avoid loading optional modules from default . (Tony Cook).
Patch rewrote to no longer depend upon @INC.
See L<https://metacpan.org/changes/distribution/Sys-Syslog>

Kept our smoker logic in F<t/syslog.t>, for slow darwin systems,
the suse patch and disabled the lexical filehandle patch.

=item Thread-Semaphore  2.13

Added C<down_timed> method.

=item Time-Local  1.24

reformatted

=item parent  0.236

improved t/parent-pmc.t,
excluded new xt tests

=item JSON::PP  2.27400_02

Fixed true/false redefinition warnings.

=back

=head1 Documentation

=head2 Changes to Existing Documentation

=head3 L<perlapi>

=over 4

=item *

Add many missing API functions.

=back

=head3 L<perlhack>

=over 4

=item *

Describe the L<perlhack/CPERL> development model, with always updated
branches, C<git rerere> and F<cp-rb>.

=back

=head3 L<perlsec>

=over 4

=item *

Describe the L<perlsec/"Taint mode"> differences (I<hash keys, use re
'taint'>), added a L<perlsec/"use warnings 'security'"> paragraph.

=item *

For hashes describe the different B<PERL_PERTURB_TOP> strategy
regarding B<Bucket Order Perturbance>, add more text to
L<perlsec/"Alternative Hash Functions"> and add a new L<perlsec/"cperl
hash security"> paragraph.

=back

=head1 Diagnostics

The following additions or changes have been made to diagnostic output,
including warnings and fatal error messages.  For the complete list of
diagnostic messages, see L<perldiag>.

=head2 New Diagnostics

Added a new warnings category B<security> which is default ON,
using a special message.

A "SECURITY: " prefix, and as suffix the username, REMOTE_ADDR, full
pathname to implement a service similar to fail2ban.  Bypass
C<$SIG{__WARN__}> handlers.  Prints to STDERR and if available to
syslog.

=head3 New Errors

=over 4

=item *

The L<Too many elements|perldiag/"Too many elements"> error is now
triggered when accessing or extending an out of bounds array index or
trying to insert too many hash keys. This is to prevent from silent
hash or array overflows. Previously extending a hash beyond it's
capable size was silently ignored, leading to performance degradation
with overly high fill factors and extending an array failed only on
memory exhaustion, but the signed index led to an index overflow
between I32 and U32, resp.  I64 and U64.

Even worse, accessing overflown unsigned array indices would silently
access the signed counterpart, indices at the end.

Note that the out of bound error message with shaped arrays is different.

=item *

The L<Panic: hash key too long|perldiag/"panic: hash key too long (%u)">
error is now thrown with overlarge hash keys in every
C<hv_common> access and in L<Cpanel::JSON::XS>.  perl5 still silently
ignores those failures, and truncates the keys.

Many more similar C<panic: (file|keyword|mro|stash)? name too long> errors
were added to the parser, compiler and runtime to protect from overlong names
(> I32_MAX, 2147483647, 2GB), or counts.

=back

=head3 New Warnings

=over 4

=item *

The new C<S security> warning "Hash flood" was added.
See L</"Protect and warn on hash flood DoS">.

=item *

The new C<S security> warnings "metasploit reverse/bind shell payload"
and "CVE-2012-1823 reverse/bind shell payload" were added, detecting
the existing metasploit/libxploit and phpcgi CVE-2012-1823 reverse and
bind shells.  See L</"Warn on metasploit reverse shells">

=back

=head1 Configuration and Compilation

=over 4

=item *

Added a new C<sanitize_address> config entry and probe, and matching
C<USE_SANITIZE_ADDRESS> F<config.h> definition.

=item *

Added a new C<d_attribute_used> config entry and probe, and matching
C<HASATTRIBUTE_USED> F<config.h> definition.

=item *

Added a new C<i_netinet_in_systm> config entry and probe, and matching
C<> F<config.h> define for L<Socket>.

=item *

Removed the C<i_netinet6_in6> Config entry and probe, and matching
C<I_NETINET6_I6> F<config.h> define, which was a typo.
This was added with cperl-5.22.2 and was never used due to the typo.
It cannot be used due to RFC 2553.

=item *

Fixed the C<__builtin_prefetch> probe, not yet used.

=item *

Added a new C<__builtin_ctz> probe, C<$Config{d_builtin_ctz} key>,
used for faster C<DO_HSPLIT()> calculations. About 30% faster for hash
intensive tests.

=back

=head1 Testing

=over 4

=item *

C<make minitest> has been vastly improved.

=item *

Fix tests for the optional C<-DNODEFAULT_SHAREKEYS> configuration.

=item *

Relax some timing sensitive smoker failures on overly slow systems,
such as darwin on Travis with DEBUGGING:

Time-HiRes: skip nanosleep test,

Sys-Syslog with not responding syslogd.

=back

=head1 Platform Support

=head2 Platform-Specific Notes

=over 4

=item Win32

=over 4

=item *

Preserve the C<Systemroot> env var during env wipe for Win32 in F<t/op/magic.t>

This fixes a test fail with VC 2005 and VC 2008 on WinXP. The
C<Systemroot> env var is required on WinXP to load SXS tracked DLLs,
VC 2005 and 2008's MS libc's are SXS tracked (before and after are
not), so once %ENV is wiped and systemroot is deleted the C<require
Win32> cant load the XS DLL because the XS DLL is linked against the
SXS tracked libc specific to 2005/2008.

L<[perl #126041]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=126041>

=item *

Added strupr() and more ENV_IS_CASELESS helper functions for non-Win32/Netware
builds with ENV_IS_CASELESS being defined to easier test caseless windows ENV
handling on non-windows platforms.

=back

=item Hurd

=over 4

=item *

Small improvements for Hurd hints: Enable usemallocwrap as on Linux.
Populate the $Config{libc} for version reporting.
L<[perl #128954]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128954>

=back

=item OpenBSD

=over 4

=item *

Fixed C<n_time> in L<Socket> for OpenBSD, by including F<netinet/in_systm.h>
before F<netinet/ip.h>.

=item *

OpenBSD does not do si_uid with sigaction()

=back

=back

=head1 Internal Changes

=over 4

=item *

L<perlapi/repeatcpy> changed the type of the 4th count argument from IV to UV.

=item *

Added a new L<perlapi/newPADNAMEpvn_flags> function which disables UTF8 via
C<flags> of C<0>, a new L<perlapi/PadnameUTF8> macro, and new C<PADNAMEt_UTF8>
and C<padadd_UTF8> bits.

=item *

The maximal size of hashes has been reduced from 63 bit back to 32 bit
on 64-bit systems, as with perl5 upstream and as with cperl-5.22. The
only problem with 63 bit was the performance overhead of having to
calculate 64-bit hashes for each string, which was not worth it. For
overlarge hashes use tie to an external library which handle bigger
sizes and external maps.

This affects C<xhv_keys>, C<xhv_max>, C<xhv_riter>, C<xhv_fill_lazy>,
placeholders and the return values and arguments of most C<hv_>
functions and macros.  C<xhv_riter> is now a full C<U32>, thus the
previous tombstone value C<-1> is now C<U32_MAX>, so contrary to perl5
you can still iterate over the full keys range, and not just the half
of it.

=item *

C<PL_maxo> is now tracked/incremented in C<custom_op_register()>.

The static number of OPs is determined by the static C<MAXO>
definition, but users can add custom ops.

Note that perl5.25.4 removes the dynamic part C<maxo>.
We find it useful, as only C<maxo> returns the number of current ops.

=item *

C<HVhek_MASK> is now only 0x03, sames as C<HVhek_ENABLEHVKFLAGS>, which is
not needed anymore.

C<HVhek_MASK> is only needed during hash collision comparisons.
There we only need the 2 HEK UTF8 bits: C<HVhek_UTF8> and C<HVhek_WASUTF8>,
but not the 3 others: UNSHARED, TAINTED, STATIC. (the 2 last being
cperl-only)

=back

=head1 Selected Bug Fixes

=over 4

=item *

More B<I32/IV/SSize_t fixes>, against huge data (2GB) overflows
on 64bit.

We are now in a 64bit world and need to get rid of all the wrong
32bit (2GB) size limits.
Some of these fixes seem to be even security relevant, as in the last
2GB series from L<[cperl #123]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/123>.

chop/chomp of only half of overlarge arrays.

Or ~"a"x2G complement of overlarge strings, silently processing only
the half - as with overlong hash keys.

There was also a smartmatch Array - CodeRef rule, which passed only over
half the array elements.  The Hash part was also wrong, but the wrong number
was not used.

regex match group of >2GB string len.

Allow repeat count >2GB and don't silently cap it at IV_MAX. Which was
at least better then silent wrap around.

Missing optimization of inplace substitution via clen overflow.

=item *

Fixed several B<heap-buffer-overflows> detected by asan:
use-after-free in Dynaloader (ReadKey probe with -DDEBUG_LEAKING_SCALAR),
heap-overflow in gv_fetchfile (t/comp/parser.t),
heap-overflow with signatures,
heap-overflow in XSLoader,
invalid memEQc in toke.c missing out on parsing #!perl -opts,
B-C global-buffer-overflow with dynamic COW strings, wrong savepvn args.

There are still heap-use-after-free problems with perlcc and PERL_DESTRUCT_LEVEL=2.

See L<[cperl #207]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/207>

=item *

Fixed overwriting the C<HVhek_UNSHARED> bit in the hash loop broken with
v5.9.

This fixed C<-DNODEFAULT_SHAREKEYS>. In the default configuration
without NODEFAULT_SHAREKEYS since 5.003_001 all hash keys are stored
twice, once in the hash and once again in C<PL_strtab>, the global
string table, with the benefit of faster hash loops and copies. Almost
all hashtables get the SHAREKEYS bit.
With C<-Accflags=-DNODEFAULT_SHAREKEYS> simple scripts are 20-30% faster.
L<[cperl #201]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/201>

=item *

Fix HEK_TAINTED check for HEf_SVKEY values. A HEf_SVKEY hek has no
tainted flag, the pointed to SV has. This is a cperl-only security
feature.

=item *

Only clear LS_COLORS for glob

When miniperl calls csh to implement glob(), we cleared %ENV
temporarily to avoid csh dying on invalid values for things like
LS_COLORS.  That has proven to have far too many problems, since many
system-dependent env vars are necessary for calling an external
process.  See the L<[perl #126041]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=126041> ticket for details.

A better solution is temporarily to clear only those vars that are
known to be problematic and make csh possibly fail.  There only hap-
pens to be one of those at present, namely LS_COLORS.

=item *

A SEGV in mess_sv during global destruction with a DEBUGGING perl and
-DS been fixed, occuring when we wanted to report the location of an
error when curcop has already been freed.

Testcase: C<./miniperl -DS -e '$_="f"; s/./"&".$&/ee'>

L<[perl #129027]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=129027>

=item *

A SEGV in ck_chift with an empty/wrong current function, caused by a
syntax error has been fixed. The syntax error is now reported lateron.
Testcase: C<'qq{@{sub{q}}]]}}; s0{shift'>

L<[perl #125351]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=125351>

=item *

Since Perl 5.20, line numbers have been off by one when perl is invoked with
the B<-x> switch.  This has been fixed.
L<[perl #128508]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128508>

=item *

Handle missing Unicode heredoc terminators correctly.
E.g. C<perl -CS -e 'use utf8; q«'>
prints now C<Can't find string terminator "«" anywhere before EOF at -e line 1.>

L<[perl #128701]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128701>

=item *

Mentioning a constant twice in a row does not lead to assertions
errors with DEBUGGING builds, such as e.g. C<sub ub(){0} ub ub>.

L<[perl #126482]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128701>

=item *

C< until ($x = 1) { ... } > and C< ... until $x = 1 > now properly
warn when syntax warnings are enabled.
L<[perl #127333]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=127333>

=item *

C<require> followed by a single colon (as in C<foo() ? require : ...> is
now parsed correctly as C<require> with implicit $_, rather than
C<require "">.
L<[perl #128307]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128307>

=item *

Code that looks for a variable name associated with an uninitialized value
could cause an assertion in cases where magic is involved, such as
C<$ISA[0][0]>.
L<[perl #128253]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128253>

=item *

In Perl 5.18, the parsing of C<"$foo::$bar"> was accidentally changed, such
that it would be treated as C<$foo."::".$bar>.  The previous behavior, which
was to parse it as C<$foo:: . $bar>, needs to be restored.
L<[perl #128478]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128478>

=item *

A crash caused by code generating the warning "Subroutine STASH::NAME
redefined" in cases such as C<sub P::f{} undef *P::; *P::f =sub{};> needs to be
fixed.  In these cases, where the STASH is missing, the warning should appear
as "Subroutine NAME redefined".
L<[perl #128257]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128257>

=item *

An assertion triggered by some code that handles deprecated behavior in
formats needs to be fixed, e.g. in cases like this:

    format STDOUT =
    @
    0"$x"

L<[perl #128255]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128255>

=item *

Some regular expression parsing glitches could lead to assertion failures with
regular expressions such as C</(?<=/> and C</(?<!/>.
L<[perl #128170]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128170>

=item *

Fixed a SEGV with C<cperl -Dsv -e'$_="q0" and s///ge'> in Perl_deb_stack_all()
L<[perl #129029]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=129029>

=item *

Array and hash index overflow are now properly detected and throw an
"Too many elements" error.

E.g. on 32bit C<$ary[2147483648]> will lead to a compile-time error,
C<$i=2147483648; $ary[$i]> to a run-time error. Before 5.24c or with perl5
those two would silently overflow to C<-1>, i.e. accessing the last element.

When inserting more than U32, i.e. 4294967295 hash elements, the same
error is now thrown. Before 5.24c or with perl5 the element would have
been inserted, with 32bit the hash table would not have been extended
and the load factor would increase, the collisions and performance
would decrease.  On 64bit the hash table would have beed increased,
but the elements would collide on the last element, leading to the
same problems, just more dramatic.

=back

=head1 Known Problems

Most of these fixes still need to be backported from perl5.25.x upstream:

=over 4

=item *

F<t/op/taint.t> contained a test with signatures and 6 default
arguments, which on some 32 bit systems led to random "Reference
parameter cannot take default value at op/taint.t line 2461"
compile-time failures. This test has been rewritten to ony use 4 arguments.

See L<[cperl #164]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/164>

=item *

C<clang -flto=thin> and on some systems even C<gcc -flto> with C<-O3>
or C<-finline> leads to invisible symbols which were inlined and not
exported, even if they should be declared as public API. Work is
ongoing in the F<feature/gh186-lto-thin> branch, but there the
inlining is disabled by the C<used> attribute, leading to a
10% performance regression.  On the other hand a working
C<clang-3.9 -flto> leads to 20% performance improvements.

=item *

List assignment to C<vec> or C<substr> with an array or hash for its first
argument used to result in crashes or "Can't coerce" error messages at run
time, unlike scalar assignment, which would give an error at compile time.
List assignment now gives a compile-time error, too.
L<[perl #128260]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128260>

=back

=head1 Acknowledgements

cperl 5.25.1 represents approximately 4 months of development since cperl 5.25.0
and contains approximately 18,000 lines of changes across 270 files from 13
authors.

Excluding auto-generated files, documentation and release tools, there were
approximately 7,200 lines of changes to 140 .pm, .t, .c and .h files.

Perl continues to flourish into its third decade thanks to a vibrant community
of users and developers. The following people are known to have contributed the
improvements that became cperl 5.25.1:

Reini Urban, David Mitchell, Father Chrysostomos, Daniel Dragan, Karl
Williamson, Yves Orton, Pino Toscano, Tony Cook, Lukas Mai, James Raspass,
Aristotle Pagaltzis, Misty De Meo, Nicolas Rochelemagne.

The list above is almost certainly incomplete as it is automatically generated
from version control history. In particular, it does not include the names of
the (very much appreciated) contributors who reported issues to the Perl bug
tracker.

Many of the changes included in this version originated in the CPAN modules
included in Perl's core. We're grateful to the entire CPAN community for
helping Perl to flourish.

For a more complete list of all of Perl's historical contributors, please see
the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source distribution.

Generated with:

    cperl Porting/acknowledgements.pl cperl-5.25.1..HEAD

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the articles recently
posted to the comp.lang.perl.misc newsgroup and the perl bug database at
L<https://rt.perl.org/> .  There may also be information at
L<http://www.perl.org/> , the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please run the L<cperlbug> program
included with your release.  Be sure to trim your bug down to a tiny but
sufficient test case.  Your bug report, along with the output of C<perl -V>,
will be sent off to perlbug@perl.org to be analysed by the Perl porting team.

If you think it's a cperl specific bug or trust the cperl developers more 
please file an issue at L<https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues>.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications which make it
inappropriate to send to a publicly archived mailing list, then see
L<perlsec/SECURITY VULNERABILITY CONTACT INFORMATION>
For details of how to report the issue.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
