=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl5261cdelta - what is new for cperl v5.26.1

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes the differences between the cperl 5.26.0c
and the cperl 5.26.1c releases.

If you are upgrading from an earlier release such as v5.24.2c, first
read the L<perl5260cdelta> documentation, which describes differences
between v5.24.2c and v5.26.0c

=head1 Performance Enhancements

=over 4

=item *

Optimized method lookup on classes

C<hv_common()> can use combined C<HV_FETCH_ISEXISTS>, which
just skips the restricted stash error on classes.

Now again with the same speed as before 5.24.0c, using a single method
hash lookup, not two.

=back

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item L<Archive::Tar> 0.26

'0' is a valid name for an archive, change 'iter' to check definedness.
See L<https://metacpan.org/changes/distribution/Archive-Tar>

=item L<B> 1.68_07

Add non-destructive $cv->PUREGV method, which does not create a GV
from a CvNAMED $cv.
Warning: $cv->GV does create a GV from a CvNAMED $cv.

=item L<B::C> 1.55_04

Protect from destructive $cv->GV, renamed is_lexsub to is_named,
allow @0, &0, ... types.

=item L<B::Debug> 1.25

Deprecated from CORE, will not be in 5.30 anymore.
Avoid destructive CvNAMED vivification to GVs.
Add cperl features.

=item L<Cpanel::JSON::XS> 3.0233

MSVC 14.0 support and higher, changed nan in the runtime.

=item L<Devel::PPPort> 3.36_02

Support strict hashpairs, fix for . in @INC.

Add C<#if { CPERL && VERSION > 5.26.0 }> support,
support parser enum expectation.

=item L<Encode> 2.92

Skip the flapping test F<t/Aliases.t> on threaded smokers, with random
segfaults.  This is a long standing core bug, with PMOP aliases or
clone. First observed at L<https://github.com/rurban/perl-compiler/issues/73>
(since 5.6)

Stop directory tweaking $Encode::Encoding{utf8}

Fix gcc warnings for older gcc < 4.0

Where possible do not depend on value of $@, instead use return value
of eval

Fix more XS problems in Encode.xs file

Load modules Encode::MIME::Name and Storable normally

Remove no warnings 'redefine'; and correctly loaddependences

Remove PP stubs and reformat predefine_encodings()

Run Encode XS BOOT code at compile time

Use Encode::define_encoding and propagate carp/croak message

cperl fixes: encoding undeprecated, no strict hashpairs

Cleanup code for handling fallback/replacement characters

=item L<ExtUtils::CBuilder> 0.280226

Fix C++ compiler detection (RT #131749)

=item L<ExtUtils::Install> 2.14

- Fix tests for when perl path contains a space

- Fix win32 check

- 'make -s' support: set $INSTALL_QUIET automatically

- Optimisations:

  * use our instead of vars
  * lazy load modules
  * make OS variables into constants
  * move some calculations out of a loop

- Removed instructions using Build.PL from README

- Load Win32API::File for _move_file_at_boot only when needed

- Allow disabling autosplit by omitting autosplit dir

=item L<ExtUtils::MakeMaker> 8.30_04

Merge our fixes to upstream 7.30 (which has e.g. the dlltool mingw
fixes). Many fixes were already in, but some new upstream bugs crept
in.

Support IO::Scalar handle as $parsefile argument to
ExtUtils::MM_Unix::parse_version().

fix Invalid Locale symbol name. Invalid identifier "ENCODING_UTF-8"
while "strict names"

fix XSMULTI static with strict linkers, avoid duplicate symbol
_boot_XS__Test in: Test.o blib/arch/auto/XS/Test/Test.a(Test.o)

xsstatic: fixup MAKE_APERL_FILE, which was Makefile.aperl.aperl

=item L<ExtUtils::ParseXS> 3.35_02

Moved xs pods still missing from the CPAN release completely to core.

Bump versions.

=item L<File::Path> 3.15_01c

Remove erroneous documentation.
Correct skip count for Windows.
Comment out two TODO tests.
Make subdirectory names used in tests more random.

=item L<File::Spec::Functions> 3.36_05

Bumped version from unparsable 3.3.65, which prevented e.g.
File::chdir to install.

=item L<Filter::Simple> 0.94

Various small documentation fixes.
Swap out base.pm use for parent.pm.
Remove use of deprecated \C regex feature.
Filter::Simple was erroneously signalling eof if it encountered a
‘no MyFilter’ right after ‘use’:
      use MyFilter;
      no MyFilter;
In this case it should simply not filter anything.

=item L<Getopt::Long> 2.50

Fix bug L<https://rt.cpan.org/Ticket/Display.html?id=120231>.

Fix bug L<https://rt.cpan.org/Ticket/Display.html?id=120300>.
Unfortunately, this withdraws a small part of fix 114999.  GNU
C<getopt_long()> does not accept the (optional) argument to be passed
to the option without C<=> sign.  We do, since not doing so breaks
existing scripts.

Provide a default value for options (B<gnu_compat> mode).
Thanks to Andrew Gregory.

=item L<IO>

Bump versions of 3 Socket modules.

=item L<IPC::Cmd> 0.98

Added wait_loop_callback for run_forked()

Only search in curdir in can_run() when on Win32 RT#105601

=item L<JSON::PP> 2.94_01

Various, see L<https://metacpan.org/changes/distribution/JSON-PP>

=item L<Locale::Codes> 3.53

Fixed the default error condition in legacy modules.

=item L<Math::BigRat> 0.2613

Fix problem with second operand being changed in multiplication (CPAN
RT #121139).

=item L<Memoize> 1.03

Skip flapping, timer-sensitive F<t/expmod_t.t> tests
on Travis CI.

=item L<Net::Ping> 2.61

Fix ping_udp for a started udp echo server (PR#5 by Stephan Loyd)

Fix t/400_ping_syn.t phases

Try to handle Windows Socket::getnameinfo errors

Improve some tests on missing network connections

=item L<PathTools> 4.68c

Add security usage note to File::Spec::no_upwards
white space change so can compile under C++11
Protect modules also from . in @INC [perl #127384] (CVE-2016-1238)

=item L<Search::Dict> 1.07_01

Bump version

=item L<SelectSaver> 1.02_01

Bump version

=item L<Storable> 3.05_13

mingw fix: use safe defaults, not segfaulting defaults.
mingw fails on the stacksize binary search, leaving it empty.

=item L<threads> 2.16_01

Fix Clang macro backward compatibility per patch by Andy Grundman.
Keep the old better doc.
Keep our modglobal fix in global destruction from 2.12_01.

=item L<threads::shared> 1.57

Fix Clang macro backward compatibility per patch by Andy Grundman.
RT #131124 Memory allocation fix.

=item L<Time::HiRes> 1.9744_01

upstream:

add more potential clock constants, like CLOCK_MONOTONIC_FAST
(available in FreeBSD), and not all potentially found clock constants
were properly exported to be available from Perl, see your system's
clock_gettime() documentation for the available ones

correct declared minimum Perl version (should be 5.6, was declared as
5.8 since 1.9727_03): blead af94b3ac

merged with our cperl test fixes.
See L<https://github.com/rurban/Time-HiRes/tree/cperl>

=item L<VMS::Studio> 2.41_01

Bump version

=item L<Win32API::File> 0.1204

Fix xsubpp warnings

=back

=head1 Documentation

=head2 Changes to Existing Documentation

=head3 L<perlxs>, L<perlxstut>, L<perlxstypemap>

=over 4

=item *

Moved from F<dist/ExtUtils-ParseXS> to core F<pod/>, as the upstream CPAN
releases do not contain them anymore.

=back

=head1 Configuration and Compilation

=over

=item *

Added support for the pgcc pgi compiler http://www.pgroup.com/.
pgcc is very slow though. pgcc -O2 is 40% slower than gcc-6 -O3,
pgcc -fast 30% slower.
L<[cperl #279]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/279>.

=item *

C<inc_version_list> skips now older development versions. It only
includes older non-devel versions with even numbers.
See L<[cperl #284]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/284>

=item *

C<-Dusedevel> is needed to be added to all development versions anymore,
it is now the default on such. A big warning is still being displayed,
even in the usual silent auto mode C<-des>.
See L<[cperl #283]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/283>

=back

=head1 Utility Changes

=head2 L<cperlivp>

=over 4

=item *

Add support for C<-d DESTDIR>, e.g. after

    make -s -j4 install DESTDIR=$HOME/cperl-inst
    cd $HOME/cperl-inst/usr/local/bin &&
    ./cperl cperlivp -p -d $HOME/cperl-inst

See L<[cperl #305]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/305>

=back

=head1 Testing

=over 4

=item *

Fixed F<Porting/cmpVERSION.pl> resp. F<t/porting/cmp_version.t>

=item *

cygwin: loose file stat tests for AdminUsers

=back

=head2 Platform-Specific Notes

=over 4

=item mingw

cperl on mingw was previously unsupported and didn't compile nor work.

The plan is to use mingw 32bit and 64bit packages instead of MSVC
compiled packages, which do require a special MS runtime DLL.

Fixed invalid check_type_and_open macro on mingw miniperl.

Fixed upstream mkstemp API changes.

getcwd is deprecated on Windows. use _getcwd() instead.

=over

=item *

Removed the broken F<dlltool>, which corrupted 64bit DLL's for years.
In our case L<Cpanel::JSON::XS> and L<Unicode::Normalize>.
Just use C<gcc> to create dll's and import libs, as in cygwin.

=item *

Added version specific gcc config values.

The default mingw configs were extremely defensive and slow.  Even
gcc-2.95.3 settings were disabled. Now several modern builtins and
attributes are used.

Fixed the wrong C<d_u32align> default, which caused L<Digest::MD5> to
crash.

=item *

Fixed C<BUILTIN_*_OVERFLOW> macros for mingw64, which uses long long
for normal IV/UV on win64.

=item *

Removed the version suffix from the importlib which is the entry for
C<$Config{libperl}>. C<-lcperl> works now for the compiler and embedders.
Just keep the version on MSVC, e.g. F<cperl526.lib>, as this had special
logic in perlcc already.

=item *

Improved F<t/run/switchDBG.t> for C<-D''> and C<-T> tests.

=item *

Fixed building of the extensions with the F<Extensions_normalize> target.

=item *

Switched from F<C:\MinGW> to F<C:\Strawberry\c> as default B<CCHOME> prefix.
This is much more stable on 64bit, and easier to setup.

=item *

The compiler F<perlcc> only works with very simple programs under mingw yet.
With dynaloaded XS modules it usually fails.

=back

=back

=head1 Selected Bug Fixes

=over 4

=item *

Support method lookup from classes, i.e. restricted stashes.
Fix "Attempt to access disallowed key" error message with named
hashes, i.e. stashes.
Backported from 5.27.1c.

=item *

Fixed signature corruption with skip'ed arguments without default and
with 0, 1, undef or op defaults, such as in C<sub func ($, $=0, $=1,
$=2, $=do{$i++} $="foo", $a="bar", $b="zoot")>, with the first C<$>,
the 2nd C<$=0>, the 3rd C<$=1> and the 5th C<$=do{}> argument.
cperl-only.
Backported from 5.27.1c.

=item *

Harmonized TOKENBUF_SIZE and stack buf sizes

The max identifier length depends on the max tokenbuf size, which went
from 256 in perl5 to 1024 in cperl, mostly to speed up parsing with a
larger parser buffer. A few places still had hardcoded 256 tmpbuf sizes, which
led to wrong error messages.
See L<[cperl #293]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/293>.
Backported from 5.27.1c.

=item *

Fixed one place in C<ck_sort> for utf8 lexical variable names, which
passed the unneeded UTF8 flag to C<pad_findmy_pvn()>. In cperl all pads
are normalized UTF8 for faster searches, the flag argument must be 0.
See L<[cperl #293]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/293>.
Backported from 5.27.1c.

=item *

Fix regex stack recursion overflow with DEBUGGING

This is a regression since 5.26 (also in upstream perl5). Without
DEBUGGING it failed with the error message "Unmatched ( in regex", now
with more than 5000 open parens it will fail with the same error message.
This would be security relevant if one would use a DEBUGGING perl in
production as one can construct a pattern which writes arbitrary
values to the stack, similar to the Storable
(L<[cperl #257]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/257>,
L<[cpan #97526]|https://rt.cpan.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=97526>)
stack overflow and the old 5.10 regex stack overflow attack.
See L<[cperl #293]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/293>.
Backported from 5.27.1c.

=item *

Fix NULL sv dereference in formline (for ^*) chop fallthrough to
C<FF_DECIMAL>. Coverity CID 165362

Backported from 5.27.2.

=item *

Fixed sub rettype. When the sub decl return type attribute is a
coretype set it. cperl-only.
Backported from 5.27.1c.

=item *

Fixed wrong "Don’t stringify GV in numeric cx outside warnings scope"
optimization from 5.18, which fails with code like C<$* += (** = 0)>.
See L<[cperl #299]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/299>.
Backported from 5.27.1c.

=item *

Added missing arity check to C<readline>.
E.g. C<readline(1,2,3)> errors now.
Backported from 5.27.1c.

=item *

Attempting to apply an attribute to an C<our> variable where a
function of that name already exists could result in a NULL pointer
being supplied where an SV was expected, crashing perl.
See L<[perl #131597]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=131597>.
Backported from 5.27.1c.

=back

=head1 Acknowledgements

cperl 5.26.1c represents approximately 3 months of development since
cperl 5.26.0c and contains approximately 20,000 lines of changes
across 170 files from 6 authors.

Excluding auto-generated files, documentation and release tools, there
were approximately 1,400 lines of changes to 76 .pm, .t, .c and .h
files.

The following people are known to have contributed the improvements
that became cperl 5.26.1c:

Reini Urban, Tony Cook, William N. Braswell, Jr, vendethiel, Aaron Crane.

The list above is almost certainly incomplete as it is automatically generated
from version control history. In particular, it does not include the names of
the (very much appreciated) contributors who reported issues to the Perl bug
tracker.

Many of the changes included in this version originated in the CPAN modules
included in Perl's core. We're grateful to the entire CPAN community for
helping Perl to flourish.

For a more complete list of all of Perl's historical contributors, please see
the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source distribution.

Generated with:

    cperl Porting/acknowledgements.pl cperl-5.26.0..HEAD

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the articles recently
posted to the comp.lang.perl.misc newsgroup and the perl bug database at
L<https://rt.perl.org/> .  There may also be information at
L<http://www.perl.org/> , the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please run the L<cperlbug> program
included with your release.  Be sure to trim your bug down to a tiny but
sufficient test case.  Your bug report, along with the output of C<perl -V>,
will be sent off to perlbug@perl.org to be analysed by the Perl porting team.

If you think it's a cperl specific bug or trust the cperl developers more 
please file an issue at L<https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues>.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications which make it
inappropriate to send to a publicly archived mailing list, then see
L<perlsec/SECURITY VULNERABILITY CONTACT INFORMATION>
For details of how to report the issue.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
