=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl5223cdelta - what is new for cperl v5.22.3

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes perl-only differences between the cperl 5.22.2
release and the cperl 5.22.3 release.

For B<cperl> also see F<Changes> and L<perlcperl>

=head1 Core Enhancements

=over 4

=item *

installperl ensures now that F<$prefix/bin/perl> is created. (#144)
This fixes B<perlbrew> without explicit cperl support, and needs special care
for packagers not to overwrite an existing F<bin/perl>.

=item *

New reader C<CHECK_type_ATTRIBUTES> callbacks are called within the check
phase for every attribute, falling back to C<FETCH_type_ATTRIBUTES>.

=item *

Less C<-Wnonnull-compare> compilation warnings, use more C<_NN> macros.
I.e. dont check for arguments which cannot be null.

=back

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item Scalar-List-Utils 1.45_03

Add support for utf8 and binary subroutine names and packages.
Taken from L<https://github.com/rurban/sub-name/commits/binary>

Various minor fixes.
See L<https://github.com/Scalar-List-Utils/Scalar-List-Utils/pull/44>

=item B-C 1.54_06

With some cperl-specific improvements.

Handle cperl OP_SIGNATURE, at least the simple variants,
Fix refcount of cop hints hashes with 5.22-nt
L<[perl-compiler #220]|https://github.com/rurban/perl-compiler/issues/220>,
Better UVX L and U suffices,
Handle shared IV and UV xpv structs.

No strcpy. replace with my_strlcpy in ByteLoader

=item DynaLoader 2.03c

Fixed VERSION check with @INC callbacks
L<[cperl #148]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/148>.
Reset stack after INC callbacks.

Fixes F<Class-Accessor-Grouped/t/accessors_pp.t>

=item attributes 1.10c

Fix FETCH_type_ATTRIBUTES.
L<[cperl #147]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/147>

=back

=head1 Selected Bug Fixes

=over 4

=item Fix C<for my$var> regression

Fixed cperl-5.22.2 regression causing the error
"Missing $ on loop variable". Also with C<for our$>
L<[cperl #145]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/145>

=item Fixed warnings redefine regression

Fixed cperl-5.22.2 regression causing C<Sub::Install> to fail. The
first printed ", called by" location was wrong.
L<[cperl #113]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/113>

=item Fix FETCH_type_ATTRIBUTES callbacks

Both arguments to C<FETCH_type_ATTRIBUTES> callbacks were wrong. The first was
an unassignable stash and is now the package name, and the 2nd was a cv and
is now a cvref. This was broken in cperl5.22.1 and cperl5.22.2
L<[cperl #147]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/147>

=item Wrong "Can't find Unicode property definition" error

The "Can't find Unicode property definition" error was called even
with C<!SvPOK retval>, caused by misleading indentation in utf8.c

=back

=head1 Acknowledgements

cperl 5.22.3 represents approximately 3 weeks of development since Perl 5.22.2c
and contains approximately 2,800 lines of changes across 72 files from 1
author.

Excluding auto-generated files, documentation and release tools, there were
approximately 410 lines of changes to 34 .pm, .t, .c and .h files.

Perl continues to flourish into its third decade thanks to a vibrant community
of users and developers. The following people are known to have contributed the
improvements that became Perl 5.22.3:

Reini Urban, ribasushi.

The list above is almost certainly incomplete as it is automatically generated
from version control history. In particular, it does not include the names of
the (very much appreciated) contributors who reported issues to the Perl bug
tracker.

Many of the changes included in this version originated in the CPAN modules
included in Perl's core. We're grateful to the entire CPAN community for
helping Perl to flourish.

For a more complete list of all of Perl's historical contributors, please see
the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source distribution

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the articles recently
posted to the comp.lang.perl.misc newsgroup and the perl bug database at
L<https://rt.perl.org/> .  There may also be information at
L<http://www.perl.org/> , the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please run the C<perlbug> program
included with your release.  Be sure to trim your bug down to a tiny but
sufficient test case.  Your bug report, along with the output of C<perl -V>,
will be sent off to C<perlbug@perl.org> to be analysed by the Perl porting team.

If you think it's a cperl specific bug or trust the cperl developers more 
please file an issue at L<https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues>.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications, which make it
inappropriate to send to a publicly archived mailing list, then please send it
to C<perl5-security-report@perl.org>.  This points to a closed subscription
unarchived mailing list, which includes all the p5p core committers, who will be
able to help assess the impact of issues, figure out a resolution, and help
co-ordinate the release of patches to mitigate or fix the problem across all
platforms on which Perl is supported.  Please only use this address for
security issues in the Perl core, not for modules independently distributed on
CPAN.

If you trust the cperl developers more, please send an email to
them. The p5p security teams skips many security issues, or are
unwilling to fix them.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
