=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl5260cdelta - what is new for cperl v5.26.0

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes the differences between the cperl 5.24.2
and the cperl 5.26.0 releases.

If you are upgrading from an earlier release such as v5.24.1c, first
read the L<perl5242cdelta> documentation, which describes differences
between v5.24.2c and v5.24.1c.

=head1 Notice

cperl v5.26.0c was merged with perl v5.26.0 (as all previous major
cperl releases).  The rejected upstream commits for the differences
have been documented at the github issues L<[cperl
#165]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/165> and L<[cperl
#256]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/256>.

C<${^ENCODING}> and the encoding pragma was not removed, rather fixed
instead.

User-type support is greatly enhanced. See L</Type-check assignments>,
L</HvCLASS>, L<Type-infer bless>, and L</Type-infer subroutine return
types>.  Before just coretypes were properly checked, now C<use types>
adds warnings for all other types.

The still incomplete and slow implementation for the experimental
subroutine signatures feature from 5.25.4 was not added, as cperl's
signatures are over 50% faster for over a year already and have many
more features. In detail the new C<OP_ARGELEM>, C<OP_ARGDEFELEM> and
C<OP_ARGCHECK> are not used, cperl still uses a single C<OP_SIGNATURE>
op and passes its arguments properly as in XS on the stack, not via C<@_>.

cperl doesn't use the slow Siphash 1-3 as default on 64bit, and no
hybrid hash function as introduced with 5.25.8. cperl rather uses a
short and fast hash function and other typical hash table
optimizations, while adding proper security in the collision
resolution instead. A secure PRF (pseudo random function) can never
ensure DoS safety for a hash table, contrary to the Siphash paper
claims.

=head1 Core Enhancements

=head2 No magic to undef/yes/no/placeholder SVs

cperl silently forbids attaching magic to the four major builtin SV
sentinels undef, yes, no and placeholder, which are mostly compared to
by pointer. Adding magic to them will break that comparison.

=head2 Type-check assignments

Assignment type violations are now also warned, with C<use warnings 'types'>
enabled, previously only signature types were checked.
Only signature type violations or C<use types 'strict'> violations
are fatal.

Note that the type system is still completely unsound. So far it is
only there to catch the most common errors and enable coretype
optimizations.
cperl only.

=head2 HvCLASS

With cperl C<use base> or C<use fields> now closes the C<@ISA> and
hereby enable compile-time checks and optimizations. The new
C<Internals::HvCLASS> function gets or sets the same type for
base/field classes as with the upcoming class keyword.
See L<[cperl #249]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/249>.
cperl only.

=head2 Type-infer bless

bless with a constant 2nd argument, the classname, infers this type to
the enclosing sub if its the last statement in a body, or to the
left-side assignment of a lexical variable.
cperl only.

=head2 Type-infer subroutine return types

Subroutine types, either declared or inferred, are now passed through
to the type-checker at compile-time.
cperl only.

=head2 for qw() is legal again

perl5.14 deprecated and 5.18 started disallowing a
L<for|perlsyn/"Statement Modifiers"> loop with a
L<qw()|perlop/"qw/STRING/"> list, "qw-as-parens".

The rationale to remove the handy C<for qw()> syntax was technical and
trivial to fix.  cperl 5.25.3 re-instated it for C<for> loops, but
not for the rest.  cperl does not insist on the backwards syntax to
require C<(qw( ... ))> around the C<for> list.

   cperl5.25.3 -e'for qw(a b c) { print $_ }'

   perl5.18 -e'for (qw(a b c)) { print $_ }'

   perl5.14 -e'for $_ qw(a b c) { print $_ }'
   => Use of qw(...) as parentheses is deprecated at -e line 1

   perl5.12  -e'for $_ qw(a b c) { print $_ }'

The new additional cperl syntax is even easier to use than before.
See L<[cperl #26]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/26>.
cperl only.

=head2 Perl can now do default collation in UTF-8 locales on platforms
that support it

Some platforms natively do a reasonable job of collating and sorting in
UTF-8 locales.  Perl now works with those.  For portability and full
control, L<Unicode::Collate> is still recommended, but now you may
not need to do anything special to get good-enough results, depending on
your application.  See
L<perllocale/Category C<LC_COLLATE>: Collation: Text Comparisons and Sorting>

=head2 Better locale collation of strings containing embedded C<NUL>
characters

In locales that have multi-level character weights, these are now
ignored at the higher priority ones.  There are still some gotchas in
some strings, though.  See
L<perllocale/Collation of strings containing embedded C<NUL> characters>.

=head2 Unescaped literal C<"{"> characters in regular expression
patterns are no longer permissible

You have to now say something like C<"\{"> or C<"[{]"> to specify to
match a LEFT CURLY BRACKET.  This will allow future extensions to the
language.  This restriction is not enforced, nor are there current plans
to enforce it, if the C<"{"> is the first character in the pattern.

These have been deprecated since v5.16, with a deprecation message
displayed starting in v5.22.

=head2 Literal control character variable names are no longer permissible

A variable name may no longer contain a literal control character under
any circumstances.  These previously were allowed in single-character
names on ASCII platforms, but have been deprecated there since Perl
v5.20.  This affects things like C<$I<\cT>>, where I<\cT> is a literal
control (such as a C<NAK> or C<NEGATIVE ACKNOWLEDGE> character) in the
source code.

=head2 New regular expression modifier C</xx>

Specifying two C<x> characters to modify a regular expression pattern
does everything that a single one does, but additionally TAB and SPACE
characters within a bracketed character class are generally ignored and
can be added to improve readability, like
S<C</[ ^ A-Z d-f p-x ]/xx>>.  Details are at
L<perlre/E<sol>x and E<sol>xx>.

=head2 C<NBSP> is no longer permissible in C<\N{...}>

The name of a character may no longer contain non-breaking spaces.  It
has been deprecated to do so since Perl v5.22.

=head2 C<CORE> subroutines for hash and array functions callable via
reference

The hash and array functions in the C<CORE> namespace--C<keys>, C<each>,
C<values>, C<push>, C<pop>, C<shift>, C<unshift> and C<splice>--, can now
be called with ampersand syntax (C<&CORE::keys(\%hash>) and via reference
(C<< my $k = \&CORE::keys; $k->(\%hash) >>).  Previously they could only be
used when inlined.

=head2 Unicode 9.0 is now supported

A list of changes is at
L<http://www.unicode.org/versions/Unicode9.0.0/>.  Modules that are
shipped with core Perl but not maintained by p5p do not necessarily
support Unicode 9.0.  L<Unicode::Normalize> does work on 9.0.

Note that some changed UCD database files in 9.0 stayed renamed to their
shortened name in perl.

=head2 Use of C<\p{I<script>}> uses the improved Script_Extensions property

Unicode 6.0 introduced an improved form of the Script (C<sc>) property, and
called it Script_Extensions (C<scx>).  As of now, Perl uses this improved
version when a property is specified as just C<\p{I<script>}>.  The meaning of
compound forms, like C<\p{sc=I<script>}> are unchanged.  This should make
programs be more accurate when determining if a character is used in a given
script, but there is a slight chance of breakage for programs that very
specifically needed the old behavior.  See L<perlunicode/Scripts>.

=head2 Declaring a reference to a variable

As an experimental feature, Perl now allows the referencing operator to come
after L<C<my()>|perlfunc/my>, L<C<state()>|perlfunc/state>,
L<C<our()>|perlfunc/our>, or L<C<local()>|perlfunc/local>.  This syntax must
be enabled with C<use feature 'declared_refs'>.  It is experimental, and will
warn by default unless C<no warnings 'experimental::refaliasing'> is in effect.
It is intended mainly for use in assignments to references.  For example:

    use experimental 'refaliasing', 'declared_refs';
    my \$a = \$b;

See L<perlref/Assigning to References> for slightly more detail.

Note that this still looks much worse than the perl6 bind operator:
    my $a := $b;

=head2 Indented Here-documents

This adds a new modifier '~' to here-docs that tells the parser
that it should look for /^\s*$DELIM\n/ as the closing delimiter.

These syntaxes are all supported:

    <<~EOF;
    <<~\EOF;
    <<~'EOF';
    <<~"EOF";
    <<~`EOF`;
    <<~ 'EOF';
    <<~ "EOF";
    <<~ `EOF`;

The '~' modifier will strip, from each line in the here-doc, the
same whitespace that appears before the delimiter.

Newlines will be copied as is, and lines that don't include the
proper beginning whitespace will cause perl to croak.

For example:

    if (1) {
      print <<~EOF;
        Hello there
        EOF
    }

prints "Hello there\n" with no leading whitespace.

=head2 '.' and @INC

The old cperl C<-Dfortify_inc> security feature was now also
introduced by perl5 and renamed to C<-Ddefault_inc_excludes_dot>.

Because the testing and make process for perl modules does not work well with
C<.> missing from @INC, cperl and perl5 still support the environment variable
C<PERL_USE_UNSAFE_INC=1> which makes Perl behave as it previously did, returning
C<.> to @INC in all child processes.

=head2 create a safer utf8_hop() called utf8_hop_safe()

Unlike C<utf8_hop()>, C<utf8_hop_safe()> won't navigate before the
beginning or after the end of the supplied buffer.

=head2 @{^CAPTURE}, %{^CAPTURE}, and %{^CAPTURE_ALL}

C<@{^CAPTURE}> exposes the capture buffers of the last match as an array. So C<$1> is
C<${^CAPTURE}[0]>.

C<%{^CAPTURE}> is the equivalent to C<%+> (ie named captures)

C<%{^CAPTURE_ALL}> is the equivalent to C<%-> (ie all named captures).

=head2 Improved .pmc loading

cperl now sets the correct F<.pmc> filename for C<__FILE__> and
C<CopFILE>, when it was loaded from it.

cperl also allows bypassing a F<.pmc> if loaded explicitly via
L<do|perlfunc/do> and an absolute pathname.

This allows improved F<.pmc> file caching of only selective parts of a
module. Such as a method jit, which stores onlt some subs, but not the
whole module in it's cache.  Hence the Cache logic in the F<.pmc> can now
first load the parallel source F<.pm> and then apply the F<.pmc>
optimizations. E.g. by loading a LLVM F<.bc> file contents with only
some subs.

The impact for existing code is low. If you loaded a .pmc via
C<do "/abspath/module.pm"> you need to add now a final "c" explictly:
C<do "/abspath/module.pmc">.

With perl5 upstream those two longstanding PMC bugs made it
impossible to use a partial Byte- or JitCache.
It also makes it possible to re-instate the old python-like timestamp
logic which was removed for pugs 2006 with commit
L<a91233bf4cf|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/commit/a91233bf4cf6a12df8935c3530a6ca900ca6ca2f>.

See L<[cperl #244]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/244>.
cperl only.

=head2 Added SAFE_RX_ substrs accessors

    SAFE_RX_CHECK_SUBSTR(rx)
    SAFE_RX_ANCHORED_SUBSTR(rx)
    SAFE_RX_ANCHORED_UTF8(rx)
    SAFE_RX_FLOAT_SUBSTR(rx)
    SAFE_RX_FLOAT_UTF8(rx)

Other regex engines don't fill C<<< rx->substrs->data[] >>>, so it is unsafe
to access it. Only allow ext/re and Perl_core_reg_engine.
Currently only used in L<op_dump()|perlapi/op_dump>.

=head1 Security

=head2 Storable stack overflows

By reading malcrafted local Storable files or memory you could easily
overwrite the local stack with controlled data.  With bigger values
you could cause an immediate exit, without backtrace or an exception
being caught.

Another major stack-overflow fix is for
L<[cpan #97526]|https://rt.cpan.org/Ticket/Display.html?id=97526>,
limiting the maximal number of nested hash or arrays to 3000.
Cpanel::JSON::XS has it at 512.

Note that p5p doesn't think that these are security issues.
L<[perl #130635]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=130635>
(even if similar less severe attacks had a CVE and a metasploit module,
which cperl detects).

cperl only so far. Uploaded to CPAN, but at this date still unauthorized.

=head2 "Escaped" colons and relative paths in PATH

On Unix systems, Perl treats any relative paths in the PATH environment
variable as tainted when starting a new process.  Previously, it was
allowing a backslash to escape a colon (unlike the OS), consequently
allowing relative paths to be considered safe if the PATH was set to
something like C</\:.>.  The check has been fixed to treat C<.> as tainted
in that example.

=head2 Unicode identifiers: Moderately Restrictive Level

cperl as first dynamic scripting language follows the B<General
Security Profile> for identifiers in programming languages.

B<Moderately Restrictive>: Allow C<Latin> with other Recommended or
Aspirational scripts except C<Cyrillic> and C<Greek>. Otherwise, the same as
L<Highly Restrictive|http://www.unicode.org/reports/tr39/#Identifier_Characters>,
i.e. allow C<:Japanese>, C<:Korean> and C<:Hanb>.

I<<< "Some characters are not in modern customary use, and thus implementations
may want to exclude them from identifiers.  These include characters in
historic and obsolete scripts, scripts used mostly liturgically, and
regional scripts used only in very small communities or with very limited
current usage.  The set of characters in Table 4, Candidate Characters for
Exclusion from Identifiers provides candidates of these." >>>

cperl honors the
L<TR31 Candidate Characters for Exclusion from Identifiers
|http://www.unicode.org/reports/tr31/#Table_Candidate_Characters_for_Exclusion_from_Identifiers>

I.e. You may still declare those scripts as valid, but they are not
automatically allowed, similar to the need to declare mixed scripts.

    use utf8;
    my $ᭅ = 1; # \x{1b45} BALINESE LETTER KAF SASAK

=> Invalid script Balinese in identifier ᭅ for U+1B45

    use utf8 'Balinese';
    my $ᭅ = 1; # \x{1b45} BALINESE LETTER KAF SASAK
    print "ok";

=>

     ok

The scripts listed at "Table 6, Aspirational Use Scripts":
C<Canadian_Aboriginal>, C<Miao>, C<Mongolian>, C<Tifinagh> and C<Yi>
are included, i.e. need not to be declared.

With this restriction cperl fulfills the
Moderately Restrictive level for identifiers by default. See
L<http://www.unicode.org/reports/tr39/#General_Security_Profile> and
L<http://www.unicode.org/reports/tr36/#Security_Levels_and_Alerts>.

Missing for more unicode security are warnings on single-, mixed and
whole-script confusables, with a new utf8 warnings 'confusables'
subcategory L<[cperl #265]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/265>.

With special declarations of the used scripts or turning off no warnings 'utf8',
you can weaken the restriction level to B<Minimally Restrictive>.

All utf8 encoded names are checked for wellformed-ness.

=head2 C<chdir> heap-buffer-overflow on the perl stack

When called without argument it overwrote subsequent stack entries
with the easily controllable result.
L<[perl #129130]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=129130>

=head2 Improved Hash DDoS prevention

This is merely a theoretical problem, improving on the previous sleep
solution against hash floods.  Distributed hashflood attacks could
lead to memory exhaustion and denial of service in threaded servers,
which would bypass the original FAIL_DELAY-like intrusion detection
and mitigation.

First sleep, but if >128 concurrent attacks are detected, exit
hard. Use a global hash_slowdos counter.  Note that this is also
triggered by a 128*8*128 hash collision single source attack (=131072).
This is still better, faster and smaller than the java solution to
convert the linked list to a tree. We log the attackers and can block
them.
L<[cperl #246]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/246>.
cperl only.

=head2 C<@{ \327 \n }> buffer overflows

Fixed C<@{ \327 \n }> tokenizer failures and heap buffer overflows in
C<sv_vcatpvfn_flags()> with wrong tracking of C<PL_linestr>, the
currently parsed line buffer. This can easily lead to security
relevant exploits.

L<[perl #128951]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128951>

=head2 C<eval "q" . chr(overlarge)> stack overflow

In C<eval "q" . chr(100000000064)> generating the error message
C<Can't find string terminator "XXX"'> was overrunning a local buffer
designed to hold a single utf8 char, since it wasn't allowing for
the C<\0> at the end.

L<[perl #128952]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128952>

=head2 Protect and warn on hash flood DoS

If the collisions for a hash key lookup exceeds 128 tries (i.e. a
linear search in a linked list), this qualifies as a malicious hash
DoS (I<Denial of Service>) attack. Generally maximal 8-10 collisions
appear in normal hash table usage. Every 8th such hash flood attack
performs a C<sleep(2)> to limit the impact.

Detect and protect against it, also call the new C<warn_security("Hash flood")>.

This security scheme is much easier and faster than trying to hide the
random hash seed with randomized iterators and collisions lists, which
cperl doesn't use.

See L</"New Diagnostics">.

=head2 use utf8 'Script'

In order to avoid TR39 confusable security hacks, we add the following
unicode rules for identifiers and literals with B<mixed script> properties:

=over

=item *

The 'Common', 'Latin' and 'Inherited' scripts are always allowed and
don't need to be declared.

=item *

The first non-default unicode script for an identifier is
the only allowed one. This qualifies as single-script.
More scripts lead to parsers errors.

=item *

Additional unicode scripts can and should be declared via
B<use utf8 'Greek', 'script-name2'...>. This allows mixed scripts in
identifiers. This can be scoped in blocks.

=item *

To fulfill the Moderately Restrictive Level for the Unicode
L<General Security Profile
|http://www.unicode.org/reports/tr39/#Restriction_Level_Detection>
you may not mix Greek with Cyrillic identifier characters in the same program.

=back

See L<http://www.unicode.org/reports/tr39/#Mixed_Script_Detection> and
L<[cperl #229]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/229>

This holds for all identifiers (i.e. all names: package, gv, sub,
variables) and literal numbers.

Currently there exist 131 scripts, see L<utf8/"Valid scripts">.

=head2 Unicode normalization of identifiers/names

All stored utf8 names, identifiers and literals are parsed and stored
as normalized NFC unicode, which prevents from various TR39 and TR36
unicode confusable and spoofing security problems.

However, dynamically created symbols via string refs are not normalized.
C<${"$decomposed"}> stays decomposed.

Note that even perl6 stores different names for confusables, which
match each other due to their NFG rules on their string
matchers. perl5 matches strictly binary, which leads to confusable and
spoofing security problems.

See L<[cperl #228]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/228>,
L<http://www.unicode.org/reports/tr36/>,
L<http://www.unicode.org/reports/tr39>,
L<http://www.unicode.org/reports/tr31/>
and the Python 3 discussion 2007 on PEP 3131
L<https://docs.python.org/3/reference/lexical_analysis.html#identifiers>.

Python 3 normalizes to NFKC (Compatibility Decomposition, followed by
Canonical Composition), cperl uses both canonical transformations.
See L<http://unicode.org/reports/tr15/#Norm_Forms> for the difference.
Basically NFKC transforms to shorter ligatures. NFC is recommended by TR15.

=head2 No binary symbols

Fallback to the secure behvaiour as before v5.16 and strip symbol
names of everything after the first \0 character.  This protects from
creating binary symbols as with C<no strict 'refs'; ${"a\0\hidden"}>,
which were especially problematic for package names, which were mapped
1:1 to filenames.  With the default warning 'security' in effect, a
warning is produced by the L<perlapi/warn_security> API, same as for
unsafe syscalls since 5.20.

See L<perldiag/Invalid \0 character in string for SYMBOL: %s>
and L<[cperl #233]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/233>.

=head2 hash seed exposure

cperl5.22.2 added a restraint to expose the internal hash secret seed
via the environment variable PERL_HASH_SEED_DEBUG=1 to be hidden in taint mode.
See L<[cperl #114]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/114>
and L<perl5222cdelta/Core Enhancements>.

    PERL_HASH_SEED_DEBUG=1 cperl5.22.2 -e1 =>
    HASH_FUNCTION = FNV1A HASH_SEED = 0xecfb00eb PERTURB_KEYS = 0 (TOP)

    PERL_HASH_SEED_DEBUG=1 cperl5.22.2 -t -e1 => empty

But unfortunately not many perl services are actually protected with
C<-t>, even if cperl fixed taint mode to be actually secure. The
seed exposure is only needed for a debugging perl, and actually is
security relevant.

So C<PERL_HASH_SEED_DEBUG=1> will now hide the seed value in
non-DEBUGGING builds.

    PERL_HASH_SEED_DEBUG=1 cperl5.25.2 -e1 =>
    HASH_FUNCTION = FNV1A HASH_SEED = <hidden> PERTURB_KEYS = 0 (TOP)

Note that the seed is still trivially exposable via other means if a
local script can be executed, as the seed value is readable from a
fixed memory offset via unpack "P". That's why cperl fixed hash table
security via proper means in the collision resolution, not via a slow
hash function, and not via order hiding as perl5 believes in.

More discussion at L<https://github.com/google/highwayhash/issues/28> and
L<https://github.com/google/highwayhash/issues/29>.

=head2 Warn on metasploit CVE-2015-1592

Detection of the destructive attack against Movable-Type, the third
vector only, which tries to delete F<mt-config.cgi> was added to was
added to L<Storable> 3.01c.

Calls C<warn_security("Movable-Type CVE-2015-1592 Storable metasploit
attack")>, but does not protect against it.

=head2 Warn on metasploit reverse shells

Detect the metasploit payload unix/reverse_perl and some existing
variants.  This is just a dumb match at startup against existing
exploits in the wild, but not future variants.  Calls
C<warn_security("metasploit reverse/bind shell payload")>, but do not
protect against it. This warning is thrown even without C<-w>.

Also detects the CVE-2012-1823 reverse/bind shell payload, which is
widely exploited too. The security warning is called "CVE-2012-1823
reverse/bind shell payload".

=head2 syscalls warnings also security

With a warnings 'syscalls' violation, i.e. detecting C<\0> in arguments
to C API syscalls, the new 'security' warnings category overrides the 'syscalls'
category. I.e. the warning is produced by the L<perlapi/warn_security> API,
and to turn it off, you have to turn off both categories.

=head1 Deprecations

See the new L<perldeprecation> pod.

Many old deprecations got now a fixed final date, but several perl5 deprecations
were undeprecated in cperl and rather fixed. I<(as in previous cperl releases.)>

=head2 do_open, do_close macros

Those macros clash on darwin XTools with the system iostream
C<_OutputIterator> methods. We need to use the fullname
B<Perl_do_open> and B<Perl_do_close> functions whenever perl needs to be
embedded into C++ projects.

With the system C++ compiler on darwin C<do_open>, C<do_close> are now
undefined.  See L<[cperl #227]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/227>

=head2 Removed ' as package seperator

Made something like C<sub foo'bar;> a syntax error.
C<'> is not replaced by C<::> anymore when used as package seperator.
This was deprecated 10 years ago.

cperl fixed the L</c2ph> core utility using this last remaining perl4'ism,
and removed the C<isn't> method from L<Test::More>.
In a later versions C<'> can be reenabled as proper IDContinue character for
identifiers, e.g. for Test::More C<isn't>.

See L<[cperl #217]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/217>.

=head2 New items in L<perldeprecation>

=over 4

=item *

Attribute "locked" is deprecated, and will disappear in Perl 5.28

=item *

Attribute "unique" is deprecated, and will disappear in Perl 5.28

=item *

Constants from lexical variables potentially modified elsewhere are
deprecated. This will not be allowed in Perl 5.32

=item *

Deprecated use of my() in false conditional. This will be a fatal error
in Perl 5.30

=item *

File::Glob::glob() will disappear in perl 5.30. Use File::Glob::bsd_glob()
instead.

=item *

%s() is deprecated on :utf8 handles. This will be a fatal error in Perl 5.30

=item *

$* is no longer supported. Its use will be fatal in Perl 5.30

=item *

$* is no longer supported. Its use will be fatal in Perl 5.30

=item *

Opening dirhandle %s also as a file. This will be a fatal error in Perl 5.28

=item *

Opening filehandle %s also as a directory. This will be a fatal
error in Perl 5.28

=item *

Setting $/ to a reference to %s as a form of slurp is deprecated,
treating as undef. This will be fatal in Perl 5.28

=item *

Unescaped left brace in regex is deprecated here (and will be fatal
in Perl 5.30), passed through in regex; marked by S<< E<lt>-- HERE >> in m/%s/

=item *

Unknown charname '' is deprecated. Its use will be fatal in Perl 5.28

=item *

Use of bare E<lt>E<lt> to mean E<lt>E<lt>"" is deprecated. Its use
will be fatal in Perl 5.28

=item *

Use of code point 0x%s is deprecated; the permissible max is 0x%s.
This will be fatal in Perl 5.28

=item *

Use of comma-less variable list is deprecated. Its use will be fatal
in Perl 5.28

=item *

Use of inherited AUTOLOAD for non-method %s() is deprecated. This
will be fatal in Perl 5.28

=item *

Use of strings with code points over 0xFF as arguments to %s operator
is deprecated. This will be a fatal error in Perl 5.28

=back

=head1 Incompatible Changes

=head2 String delimiters that aren't stand-alone graphemes are illegal

In order for Perl to eventually allow string delimiters to be Unicode
grapheme clusters (which look like a single character, but may be
a sequence of several ones), we stop allowing a single char
delimiter that isn't a grapheme by itself.  These are unlikely to exist
in actual code, as they would typically display as attached to the
character in front of them.

E.g. C<qr ̂foobar̂;> is now an error, it is only deprecated with v5.25.9
upstream and will be illegal in perl5 v5.30.
cperl only.

=head2 for state loops still illegal

perl5.25.3 started allowing state variables in loops.
cperl still disallows them.

    perl5.25.3 -E'use feature "declared_refs","refaliasing";
                 for state \$x (\$y) { print $x }'
    => warnings: Declaring references is experimental at -e line 1.
    Aliasing via reference is experimental at -e line 1.

    cperl5.25.3 -E'use feature "declared_refs","refaliasing";
                 for state \$x (\$y) { print $x }'
    => error: Missing $ on loop variable at -e line 1.

and without declared_refs:

    perl5.25.3 -E'for state $x ($y) { print $x }'

    cperl5.25.3 -E'for state $x ($y) { print $x }'
    => error: Missing $ on loop variable at -e line 1.

=head2 C<scalar(%hash)> return value changed

The value returned for C<scalar(%hash)> will no longer show information about
the buckets allocated in the hash.  It will simply return the count of used
keys.  It is thus equivalent to C<0+keys(%hash)>.

A form of backwards compatibility is provided via C<Hash::Util::bucket_ratio()>
which provides the same behavior as C<scalar(%hash)> provided prior to Perl
5.25.

=head2 C<keys> returned from an lvalue subroutine

C<keys> returned from an lvalue subroutine can no longer be assigned
to in list context.

    sub foo : lvalue { keys(%INC) }
    (foo) = 3; # death
    sub bar : lvalue { keys(@_) }
    (bar) = 3; # also an error

This makes the lvalue sub case consistent with C<(keys %hash) = ...> and
C<(keys @_) = ...>, which are also errors.
L<[perl #128187]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128187>

=head1 Performance Enhancements

=over 4

=item Faster scalar assignments

Seperate an unlikely codepath in scalar assignments (ASSIGN_CV_TO_GV)
to another function, helping the CPU instruction cache. 10% faster on
Intel.

=item Bigger lexer buffers allowing faster memcmp

Ensure that the lexer always sees large enough buffers to do fast
wordwise memcmp comparisons, esp. with constant lengths.

=item Less initial array elements

The initial size of empty arrays went in cperl from 4 to 2, AvMAX = 1.
Array speed is 2-15% faster on perlbench, overall speed the fastest of
all so far. Memory win: <0.1%

=item if length($str) is faster

length in boolean context without get magic doesn't need to calculate
the utf8 length, it only needs to check if SvCUR field is empty.  And
it doesn't need to allocate a new IV for the result, just use the
existing sv_yes or sv_no.
Analog to L<[cperl #245]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/245> for ref.
cperl only.

=item if ref() is faster

ref in boolean context doesn't need to allocate a string.
2-3x faster. See L<[cperl #245]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/245> and
L<[perl #78288]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=78288>
cperl only. in perl5 announced for 5.28.

=item readline is faster

Reading from a file line-by-line with C<readline()> or C<< E<lt>E<gt> >> should
now typically be faster due to a better implementation of the code that
searches for the next newline character.

=item C<$ref1 = $ref2> has been optimized.

=item Array and hash assignment are faster

e.g.

    (..., @a) = (...);
    (..., %h) = (...);

especially when the RHS is empty.

Note that perl5 hash assignment is still inferior to cperl hash assignment.

=item Less SvSCREAM

Reduce the number of odd special cases for the SvSCREAM flag.

=item Better do_vop

Avoid C<sv_catpvn()> in C<do_vop()> when unneeded.

=item Better COW in Regex

Enhancements in Regex concat COW implementation.

=item Speed up AV and HV clearing/undeffing.

=item Converting a single-digit string to a number is now substantially faster.

=item Simplified split

The internal op implementing the C<split> builtin has been simplified and
sped up. Firstly, it no longer requires a subsidiary internal C<pushre> op
to do its work. Secondly, code of the form C<my @x = split(...)> is now
optimised in the same way as C<@x = split(...)>, and is therefore a few
percent faster.
This required B::* compiler changes.

=item Constant fold with barewords

Bareword constant strings are now permitted to take part in constant
folding. They were originally exempted from constant folding in August 1999,
during the development of Perl 5.6, to ensure that C<use strict "subs">
would still apply to bareword constants. That has now been accomplished a
different way, so barewords, like other constants, now gain the performance
benefits of constant folding.

This also means that void-context warnings on constant expressions of
barewords now report the folded constant operand, rather than the operation;
this matches the behaviour for non-bareword constants.

=item Less NULL ops

Most NULL ops are now removed in the peephole optimizer. Check for
C<#if defined(PERL_REMOVE_OP_NULL)> in your XS module if you hardcoded
any NULL-sensitive op-tree structure. See how many with C<-Dk>.

=item -DPERL_FAKE_SIGNATURE

C<-DPERL_FAKE_SIGNATURE> is now default, making most function calls 2x faster.
See L</fake_signatures>

=item -flto support

The new compiler option support allows generation of much faster
code. I.e. clang-4.0 with -flto or zapcc produce ~20% faster code.

=item for loops

for loops got several enhancements:

new special B<iter_ary> C<for (@ary)> and B<iter_lazyiv> C<for (0..9)>
ops to avoid a run-time switch in the generic iter op.

more aelem_u optimizations, less run-time out of bounds checks for
shaped arrays in loops. E.g. in C<my @a[5]; $a[$_] for (0..4);> the
compilers knows that the max index for C<@a> will be C<4>, which is
within the allowed shape of C<@a>.

=item omit bounds checks for multideref

The C<multideref> OP has a new C<MDEREF_INDEX_uoob> flag.  This is
used for unchecked out-of-bounds checks for arrays, to use the
previous AvSHAPED array optimizations (aelem_u, aelemfast_lex_u) or
loop out-of-bounds elimination with multideref OPs also. Such
multideref ops appear pretty often even with single indices.  E.g. in
C<my @b=(0..4); for (0..$#b) { $b[$_] = 0; }> C<$b[$_]> is converted
to a multideref, which previously was not optimized.

Those optimized indices are marked with a new " _u" suffix in the dumped
multideref stringification.

C<MDEREF_MASK> changed to 0x10F, the C<MDEREF_SHIFT> size from 7 to 8.
The shift can also use faster intrinsics now.

The loop out-of-bounds elimination was fixed for simple lexical
indices (e.g. C<for my $i (0..$#a){ $a[$i] }>, which leads now to
more aelem_u ops and subsequent mderef_u optimizations also.

=item strEQc, strNEc

The new C<strEQc>/C<strNEc> macros are used instead of
C<strEQ(s,"constant")>. This enables word-wise comparison via memcpy,
in opposite of byte-wise comparisons via strcmp with already known
sizes. This is a 10% performance improvement under most optimization
levels.

Use more C<strEQc>, C<strNEc> macros, when safe to use, i.e. the left
buffer is big enough, now with Address Sanitizer fallbacks.

The new fast buffer comparison macros C<strEQc> and C<strNEc> compare
a full string including the final C<\0>, C<memEQc> and C<memNEc> just
the start of a buffer, with constants strings. Note that valgrind and
Address Sanitizer will complain about out of range access of the left
side of the buffer. To access these buffers however is safe and will
not lead to SIGBUS on stricter platforms.  To prevent valgrind from
warning on this, you may want to define C<-DVALGRIND>, which uses a
safe and slower fallback macro.

=item padnames

Make all padnames not UTF8 per default, only the ones which are really UTF8.
See L</Internal Changes> and
L<[cperl #208]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/208>

=item av_fetch

Improvements when reading from arrays have been imported from perl5.
C<av_fetch()> uses less branches reading from the end (negative indices),
and a branch checking for freed C<@_> elements has been removed,

=item hv_common_magical

Extract C<hv_common_magical()> to a seperate function.  Extracts
uncommon magical code in hot code to an extra static function to help
keep the icache smaller. Only in rare cases this branch is
taken. I.e filling ENV at startup, or using tied hashes.

Measured 2-15% faster with normal scripts, not using tied hashes.

=item pre-allocated hash sizes with aassign

aassign: pre-allocate needed hash size with aassign, similar to
arrays, avoiding run-time hash splits.
e.g. C<my %h = (.. => .., .. => ..)>

This version is 30% faster overall in the L<Mail::SpamAssassin> testsuite
than cperl-5.25.0.

=item pre-allocate more hashes and stashes

Pre-extend internal hashes and stashes to avoid unnecessary boot-time hash
splits. C<%warnings::>, C<%Config::>, C<%utf8::>, C<%version::>.

=item Faster get_[sah]vs API

Added new C<get_svs>, C<get_avs>, C<get_hvs> macros, and accompanied
C<get_[ash]vn_flags> API functions, to omit the run-time C<strlen(name)>
for constant names. (#191)

=back


=head1 Modules and Pragmata

=head2 New Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item types 0.01

Controls the type-checker. See L<types> or L<perltypes>.

=back

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item Archive-Tar 2.24

Better 09_roundtrip.t tests.

Handle tarballs compressed with pbzip2 (RT #119262)

Add missing strict/warnings pragma to Constants.pm

Check for gzip/bzip2 before round tripping gz/bz2 files in tests

=item B  1.68_06

Use op_class API

Allow a 2nd optional CV argument for B::OP::aux_list,
fixing B::Deparse and thereby Data::Dumper and Test2 is_deeply.

use the new get_svs, get_avs, get_hvs macros.

=item B-C 1.55_02

Fixes for PERL_OP_PARENT: moresib, sibling, parent.

Fix hints/522_patched.pl dependency on C.so
L<[cpan #120161]|https://rt.cpan.org/Ticket/Display.html?id=120161>

PUSHRE replaced by SPLIT, no xpad_cop_seq, SVpbm_VALID

Improved dl_module_to_sofile without 2nd arg

Fixed IsCOW savepvn, store the last cowrefcnt.

Fixed wrong savepvn length, failing with asan.

Optimized mro_isa_changed_in initialization.

Better CopFILE_set,
Fixup arenasize refcnt.
Delay cvref to init2, properly set a SvRV to a XS sub.
Optimize constpv for CvFILE (less constants to merge for gcc).
Improve NV precision by one digit.
Fix to compile in utf8_heavy.pl, abstract and set %INC.
Fix generation of @B::C::Config::deps on Windows.
Fix !C99 precedence bug (e.g. MSVC).
Minor refactor to simplify save_hek.
Use the new get_svs, get_avs, get_hvs macros.
perlcc add --debug|-D
Improve endav XSUB bump
Abstract RITER_T and HVMAX_T for the various sizes, compat HEK_STATIC
Defer REGCOMP for \P{} properties
Change $sv->EXTFLAGS to compflags since 5.22 for CALLREGCOMP().
Turn off MGf_REFCOUNTED.
global-buffer-overflow with dynamic COW strings, wrong savepvn args.

=item B-Debug 1.24

Support 5.25.6 split optimization

=item bignum 0.47c

See L<https://github.com/rurban/bignum/commits/cperl>

=item B::Terse  1.07

Update deprecation message

=item Carp 1.42c

Handle chunk errors phrases

=item Config::Perl::V  0.27_01

=item Compress-Raw-Bzip2  2.074

Need Fix for Makefile.PL depending on . in @INC
L<RT #120084|https://rt.cpan.org/Ticket/Display.html?id=120084>

=item Compress-Raw-Zlib  2.074

Comment out unused variables & remove C++-ism.
L<RT #120272|https://rt.cpan.org/Ticket/Display.html?id=120272>

=item CPAN::Meta  2.150010c

And merge F<cpan/Parse-CPAN-Meta> into it. F<cpan/Parse-CPAN-Meta> is
gone.

Parse-CPAN-Meta security: set $YAML::XS::DisableCode, $YAML::XS::DisableBlessed.

Add support for all known YAML and JSON modules: *::Syck, JSON::MaybeXS,
Mojo::JSON.
But JSON::Any is broken.

fixed UTF-8 issues, passes now all Test-CPAN-Meta tests.

=item CPAN 2.17

with full cperl support.
reapply most of our patches.
skip cperl builtin prereqs.

See L<https://github.com/andk/cpanpm/pull/109>

=item CPAN-Meta-Requirements

Moved from cpan to dist.
L<[cperl #154]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/154>.

=item Cpanel-JSON-XS  3.0231

- Fix need() overallocation (#84 Matthew Horsfall) and missing
  need() calls.

- Fix decode_prefix offset when the string was re-allocated.
  rather return the relative offset not the pointer to the old start.

- Fixes for g++-6, stricter -fpermissive and -Wc++11-compat.

- Added tests for ill-formed utf8 sequences from Encode.

- modfl() mingw 4.0 runtime bug [perl #125924]

- Tested with the comprehensive JSON decode spectests from
  http://seriot.ch/parsing_json.html. Not added to core. #72

- decode with BOM: UTF-8, UTF-16, or UTF-32.

- fixed detection of final \0 as illegal non-whitespace garbage. Fixes
  spectest 'n_number_then_00'. #72

- warn with unicode noncharacters as in core when not in relaxed mode.
  #74

- fail decode of non-unicode raw characters above U+10FFFF
  when not in relaxed mode.

- New stringify_infnan(3) infnan_mode.

- Fix inf/nan detection on HP-UX and others.

- Use faster strEQc macros.

- Prefer memEQ for systems without memcmp, to use bcmp there.

- Add more expect_false() to inf/nan branches.

- Fix av and hv length types: protect from security sensitive overflows,
  add HVMAX_T and RITER_T

- Add new "Hash key too large" error. perl5 silently truncates it,
  but we prefer errors.

=item Config  6.22

protect sv in END during global destruction, esp. with B::C.
fixes for missing . in @INC (cperl or -Dfortify_inc).

=item Cwd  4.65c

Fix -Wc++11-compat warnings

=item Data-Dumper  2.163

Fix -Wc++11-compat warnings

strEQc improvements

fix correct indentation for utf-8 key hash elements, [perl #128524].

=item Devel-NYTProf 6.04

Fix -Wc++11-compat warnings, and various minor issues.

=item Devel::Peek  1.23_02

use the new get_svs, get_avs, get_hvs macros.
The flags where harmonized, missing names were added,
most fields are now print in natural order as in the struct.

=item Devel-PPPort 3.35_02

Fix -Wc++11-compat warnings

=item Digest::SHA  5.96

prevented shasum from possibly running malicious code,
remove '.' from @INC before module loading RT #116513,
namespace cleanup (RT #105371 and #105372),
minor code and documentation tweaks

=item DB_File 1.840

unused arg warnings
L<RT #107642|https://rt.cpan.org/Ticket/Display.html?id=107642>

The other 2 fixes were already in cperl, plus a fix for reproducible builds.

=item DynaLoader 2.07c

Fixed dl_findfile refcounts, "panic: attempt to copy freed scalar" errors.

Fixed build dependency for F<dlboot.c>. No excessive rebuilds anymore.

no mathoms: call_sv instead of call_pv, get_cvs where available.

use the new get_svs, get_avs, get_hvs macros.

=item Encode 2.88

various upstream fixes.
plus g++-6 -fpermissive and -Wc++11-compat fixes.
our local make -s silent patches and various others are now all upstream.

=item Exporter

Exporter remained unchanged. But CORE support for the "used only once"
warnings has been to restricted to the four magic names "EXPORT",
"EXPORT_OK", "EXPORT_FAIL" and "EXPORT_TAGS". Other names starting
with "EXPORT" will now throw the "used only once" warning as all other
symbols.

=item ExtUtils-Constant 0.23_08

Fix ProxySubs to generate code also valid for 5.6 - 5.14.
Add testcases for all ProxySubs options.

Fix -Wc++11-compat warnings in generated const-xs.inc code.

=item ExtUtils::MakeMaker

fix \Q$archname\E in t/basic.t

skip cperl builtin prereqs.

ExtUtils::Liblist::Kid:

one more darwin fix for the wrong no library found warning
for symlinked darwin libSystem.dylib libraries.

=item ExtUtils::Install 2.04_01

support make -s => PERL_INSTALL_QUIET

=item ExtUtils::ParseXS  3.34_02

XS_EXTERNAL does now extern "C"

Fix visibility declaration of XS_EXTERNAL for C<-flto> and
C<-fvisibility=hidden>.

=item feature  1.47_01

Revise documentation of eval and evalbytes

=item File::DosGlob  1.12_01

use the new get_svs, get_avs, get_hvs macros.

=item File::Fetch  2.52

* Set a cleaned env when running git clone
* Changed git repository link in tests
* Removed consistently failing httpbin.org tests
* Require Module::Load::Conditional 0.66
* Fix FTP tests for ipv6

=item File::Glob 1.28

Deprecated File::Glob::glob()

use the new get_svs, get_avs, get_hvs macros.

=item Filter 1.57

added 2 more pure tests

Fixes for . in @INC

added filter-util.pl to t/

fixed INSTALLDIRS back to site since 5.12 [gh #2]

=item Getopt::Std 1.12

Changed pod NAME to follow convention.

=item Getopt::Long 2.49.1

* RT #114999 fix :number
* RT #113748 fix VersionMessage ignores -output argument
* RT #39052 sanify gnu_getopt

=item HTTP::Tiny  0.070

Many fixes und improvements

=item Internals::DumpArenas 0.12_07

fix for PERL_GLOBAL_STRUCT_PRIVATE
Fix -Wc++11-compat warnings

=item IO-Compress  2.074

ISA fixes for c3
L<[perl #120239|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=120239>

=item IO::Socket::IP 0.39_01

protect sv in END during global destruction, esp. with B::C.
fixes for missing . in @INC (cperl or -Dfortify_inc).

From L<https://github.com/atoomic/IO-Socket-IP/>:

- Support setting custom socket options with new Sockopts
  constructor parameter

- Restore blocking mode after ->connect errors
  L<RT #112334|https://rt.cpan.org/Ticket/Display.html?id=112334>

- Keep demand-load Carp patch.
  https://jira.cpanel.net/browse/CPANEL-4359

=item IPC::Cmd  0.96

set $Module::Load::Conditional::FORCE_SAFE_INC = 1

=item JSON::PP  2.27400_02

Fixed true/false redefinition warnings.

=item Locale-Codes 3.51

Added Czech republic aliases back in.
Lot of new codes and code changes.

Made many private API calls public.
See L<Locale::Codes::Changes>

=item Locale::Maketext 1.28

Fix optional runtime load for CVE-2016-1238

Add blacklist and whitelist support, with
L<[perl #127923|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=127923>
 priority. See L<Locale::Maketext/"BRACKET NOTATION SECURITY">

=item Math-BigInt 1.999811_01

Merged CPAN updates with stricter tests and . in @INC fixes.
L<https://github.com/rurban/Math-BigInt>

=item Math-BigInt-FastCalc 0.5006

Updated from CPAN:

2 new tests files from Math-BigInt.

Math::BigInt::FastCalc is now a subclass of Math::BigInt::Calc, so remove
aliases like *Math::BigInt::FastCalc::_xxx = \&Math::BigInt::Calc::_xxx.

Use OO-calls rather than function calls. (i.e slower but overridable)

=item Math-BigRat 0.2612

Updated from CPAN: No functional changes,
and the few actual changes in the test lib were for the worse.
The F<bigfltpm.inc> tests are still broken and skipped, however
I improved it.

=item Module-Load-Conditional  0.68

Fix unconditional @INC localisation,
Add FORCE_SAFE_INC option to fix CVE-2016-1238.

=item Module-Metadata  1.000033

- Fix file operation in tests for VMS

- use a more strict matching heuristic when attempting to infer the
  "primary" module name in a parsed .pm file

- only report "main" as the module name if code was seen outside another
  namespace, fixing bad results for pod files (RT#107525)

=item Net-Ping 2.59

Stabilized test, geocities.com is down.

Return the port num as 5th return value with ack (jfraire).

Todo 010_pingecho.t on EBCDIC and os390.
Skip udp ping tests on more platforms: hpux, irix, aix (all from perl5)

Fixed missing C<_unpack_sockaddr_in> family, which took AF_INET6 for
a AF_INET addr in F<t/500_ping_icmp.t> and F<t/500_ping_icmp_ttl.t>.
Use now a proper default. Detected by the new gitlab ci.

Fixed C<_pack_sockaddr_in> for a proper 2nd argument type, hash or packed
address.

Improved F<500_ping_icmp.t> to try C<sudo -n> for tests requiring root,
plus adding -n fir fixing [RT #118451].
Relaxed more tests failing with firewalled icmp on localhost. [RT #118441]

Fixed C<ping_external> argument type, either packed ip or hostname. [RT #113825]

Fixed wrong skip message in F<t/020_external.t>

=item NEXT  0.67

Doc and meta changes only.

=item libnet  3.10

- Remove . from @INC when loading optional modules.  [Tony Cook, Perl
  RT#127834, CVE-2016-1238]

- Increased minimum required version of IO::Socket::IP to 0.25 to hopefully
  stop t/pop3_ipv6.t hanging.  [CPAN RT#104545]

- Debug output now includes decoded (from base64) negotiation for SASL.
  [Philip Prindeville, PR#27]

- plus the suse utf8 fixes for Net::Cmd, see 5bd7010cb and
  our darwin performance fix for hostname.

=item Opcode 1.35_01c

New iter_ary and iter_lazyiv ops.

Add avhvswitch op

=item parent  0.236

improved t/parent-pmc.t,
excluded new xt tests

=item open 1.11
=item PerlIO 1.10

pod: Suggest to use strict :encoding(UTF-8) PerlIO layer over not
strict :encoding(utf8) For data exchange it is better to use strict
UTF-8 encoding and not perl's utf8.

=item PathTools  4.67c

Add security note to File::Spec::no_upwards
L<[RT #123754|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=123754>

=item PerlIO::encoding  0.24_01

use the new get_svs, get_avs, get_hvs macros.

=item PerlIO::via  0.17

Omit wrong if (gv) check, detected by coverity.

=item Perl-OSType  1.010

Added msys

=item Pod::Html  2.23002c

fix cache races with parallel tests.
add the PID to the temp. cache file
See L<[RT #118416]|https://rt.cpan.org/Ticket/Display.html?id=118416>.

Removed deprecated C<--libpods> option.

=item podlators 4.09

Add the t/data/snippets tests.

Use Pod::Simple's logic to determine the native code
points for NO BREAK SPACE and SOFT HYPHEN instead of hard-coding the
ASCII values.  Hopefully fixes the case of mysterious disappearing
open brackets on EBCDIC systems.  (#118240)

Many Pod::Man bugfixes and new tests,
see L<https://metacpan.org/changes/distribution/podlators>

=item Pod-Perldoc  3.28

Fix broken test on Windows and FreeBSD (RT#116551)
Fix CVE-2016-1238 by temporarily removing '.' from @INC in world writable
directories.
Fix =head3 appearing in some perlfunc lookups
AmigaOS patches (RT#106798) (RT#110368)
Fall back to an English perlfunc if translation doesn't exist (RT#104695)
FreeBSD has mandoc too, with UTF-8 support.
-U now documented and implied with -F (RT#87837)
Fixes less -R flags insertion on Windows [perl #130759]

=item Pod-Simple 4.35c

Updated from CPAN 3.35: Turn off utf8 warnings when trying
to see if a file is UTF-8 or not

Merged with our cperl signature modernizations, tracked at
L<https://github.com/rurban/pod-simple/tree/cperl>.

Moved from cpan to dist.
L<[cperl #154]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/154>.

=item POSIX 1.76_02

changed speed_t to unsigned long. cannot be negative.

Fix -Wc++11-compat warnings

Several defects in making its symbols exportable.
L<[perl #127821]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=127821>

The C<POSIX::tmpnam()> interface has been removed,
see L<perl5251delta/"POSIX::tmpnam() has been removed">.

Trying to import POSIX subs that have no real implementations
(like C<POSIX::atend()>) now fails at import time, instead of
waiting until runtime.

use the new get_svs, get_avs, get_hvs macros.

=item Safe 2.40_02c

Documentation only

=item Scalar-List-Util 1.47_01

Bumped version because upstream is still years behind:
lexical $_ support, binary names, various other fixes.

Improved taint test.

sum/min/max need to call SvGETMAGIC

set_subname memory fix by @bluhm from Sub::Name 0.20
L<RT #117072|https://rt.cpan.org/Ticket/Display.html?id=117072>

Fixes for older perls, esp. lexical $_ support.

Reinstate the &DB::sub setter, but no UTF8 support yet.

=item Socket 2.024_05

Fix -Wc++11-compat warnings

Merge cpan 2.024 with our 2.021_02,
plus fix some problems in their new code.

Fixes for OpenBSD: Probe for F<netinet/in_systm.h>
Removed C<i_netinet6_in6> probe.
This was never used due to a typo.
It cannot be used due to RFC 2553.

=item Storable 3.05_12

From L<https://github.com/rurban/Storable>

Added some I32_MAX checks for tainted integers.

Fixed 3 null ptr dereferences leading to segfaults.
L<[perl #130098]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=130098>

Fixed some important security bugs with reading from Storable files
or memory, directly controlling the stack (not the perl stack).
See L</Storable stack overflow or exit>.

Another stack-overflow fix is for
L<[cpan #97526]|https://rt.cpan.org/Ticket/Display.html?id=97526>, limiting
the maximal number of nested hash or arrays to a computed number, ~3000-8000.
Cpanel::JSON::XS has it at 512.

Fixed up early huge buffer and index support from 3.00c, which was
failing with wrong malloc errors due to silently overwrap >2GB.
F<t/huge.t> works now correctly.  Note that 2 cases are not relevant
since v5.25.1c/v5.24.1c anymore as with these releases we limit the
maximum number of elements for hashes and arrays, and fail with "Too
many elements" before. Bumped up PERL_TEST_MEMORY requirements to 8 and 16
for arrays and hashes. In reality the VMM subsystem will kill the process
on perl5 before. C<$a[9223372036854]=0> or C<%a=(0..4294967296)> are easy
ways to DoS a perl5 system. Only cperl is safe.

Skip or croak when reading or writing 64bit large objects on 32bit
systems.

Fixed wrong recursion depth error with large arrays containing another
array. Probe for valid max. stack sizes, and added 2 APIs.
L<[cperl #257]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/257>

Update documentation from the CPAN version.

L</"Warn on metasploit CVE-2015-1592">

=item Sys-Syslog  0.35

CVE-2016-1238: avoid loading optional modules from default . (Tony Cook).
Patch rewrote to no longer depend upon @INC.
See L<https://metacpan.org/changes/distribution/Sys-Syslog>

Kept our smoker logic in F<t/syslog.t>, for slow darwin systems,
the suse patch and disabled the lexical filehandle patch.

=item Term-ANSIColor 4.06

Add aliases ansi16 through ansi255 and on_ansi16 through on_ansi255
(plus the corresponding constants) for the grey and rgb colors so that
one can refer to all of the 256 ANSI colors with consistent names.
These are aliases; the colors returned by uncolor will still use the
grey and rgb names.  (#118267)

=item Term::ReadKey 2.37_01

ReadKey.pm renamed to ReadKey_pm.PL,
expand blockoptions specific variants already at installation,
no load-time eval, demand-load Carp, remove unneeded AutoLoader,
harmonize formatting.

patch: use faster StructCopy and fixup the XS.

=item Test-Harness 3.39_01

Keeping our cperl and XSConfig fixes.
See L<https://github.com/rurban/Test-Harness/tree/cperl-rebased>

=item Test-Simple

Add doc and support for optional subtest @args.

Moved from cpan to dist.
L<[cperl #154]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/154>.

=item Test::More  1.401015c

Removed the deprecated C<isn't> method, using the C<'> package seperator.

=item threads  2.15

Remove extra terminating semicolon.
Clean up temporary directories after testing.

=item Thread-Queue 3.12

Calling any of the dequeue methods with COUNT greater than a queue's
limit will generate an error.

But still have to keep our test fixes for . in @INC

=item Thread-Semaphore  2.13

Added C<down_timed> method.

=item threads-shared  1.55

ifdef clang

Documentation

=item Time-Local  1.25

Less runtime memory: demand-load Carp, Config.

=item Time-HiRes  1.9742_01

Fix -Wc++11-compat warnings
Keep our better C++ fixes
Keep our t/usleep.t, t/alarm.t, t/utime.t fixes.
Keep our do_openn improvements in typemap.

from upstream:

- El Capitan compatibility
- use CLOCK_REALTIME for clock_nanosleep scan
- include file consistency in scans
- use clockid_t consistently
- use hv_fetchs()
- scan for clockid_t (needed for macos Sierra)
- darwin lacks clockid_t
  L<[cpan #129789]|https://rt.cpan.org/Ticket/Display.html?id=129789>

More Darwin thread fixes for clock_gettime,
Sierra support,
test improvements,
skip the t/utime.t on ext2/ext3

=item Unicode-Collate 1.19

Many new locales. Some major fixes.

=item version  0.9917_02c

Merge latest version with the '_' lyon concensus with the cperl extension
of the optional final 'c' suffix. Extend version::regex for cperl.
Now also parse the 'c' natively.

=item YAML::XS  0.75

merged with upstream libyaml 0.1.7
avoid duplicate checks against NULL
fix libyaml clang -Wlogical-op warnings
fix libyaml clang -Wlogical-not-parentheses warnings

fixed encoding issues: fixed wrong $YAML::XS::Encoding and
$YAML::XS::LineBreak comparison logic.
fixed utf8 input as handled as UTF8,
non-utf8 honors $YAML::XS::Encoding.

fixed -Wunused value warnings

merged with upstream YAML-LibYAML,
implemented $DisableBlessed (security).

=item XS::APItest  0.80_02

use the new get_svs, get_avs, get_hvs macros.

=item XSLoader 1.03c

coverity detected invalid branch:
if (!module) is always false. we need to check
if (!modlibname) instead.

=back

=head2 Removed Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item I18N-Collate 1.02

Compared 8-bit scalar data according to the current locale.

Deprecated with 5.003_06.
Its functionality was integrated into the Perl core language in the
release 5.003_06.

See L<perllocale> for further information.

=back

=head1 Documentation

=head2 New Documentation

=head3 L<perldeprecation>

This file documents all upcoming deprecations, and some of the deprecations
which already have been removed. The purpose of this documentation is
two-fold: document what will disappear, and by which version, and serve
as a guide for people dealing with code which has features that no longer
work after an upgrade of their perl.

=head2 Changes to Existing Documentation

=head3 L<perlobj>

=over 4

=item *

Added a section on calling methods using their fully qualified names.

=item *

Do not discourage manual @ISA.

=back

=head3 L<perlop>

=over 4

=item *

Clarify behavior single quote regexps.

=back

=head3 L<perllocale>

=over 4

=item *

Some locales aren't compatible with Perl.  Note the potential bad
consequences of using them.

=back

=head3 L<perldiag>

=over 4

=item *

Deprecations are to be marked with a D.
C<"%s() is deprecated on :utf8 handles"> use a deprecation message, and as
such, such be marked C<"(D deprecated)"> and not C<"(W deprecated)">.

=back

=head3 L<perldtrace>

=over 4

=item *

Describe which system have Dtrace. Changes in cperl. New examples.

=back

=head3 L<perlguts>

=over 4

=item *

add pTHX_ to magic method examples.

=back

=head3 L<perlvar>

=over 4

=item *

Document @ISA. Was documented other places, not not in perlvar.

=back

=head3 L<perlootut>

=over 4

=item *

Tidy the document.

=item *

Mention Moo more.

=back

=head3 L<perlhack>

=over 4

=item *

Describe the L<perlhack/CPERL> development model, with always updated
branches, C<git rerere> and F<cp-rb>.

=item *

Document Tab VS Space.

=back

=head3 L<perlre>

=over 4

=item *

Several minor enhancements to the documentation.

=back

=head3 L<perlinterp>

=over 4

=item *

L<perlinterp> has been expanded to give a more detailed example of how to
hunt around in the parser for how a given operator is handled.

=back

=head3 L<perlcall>

=over 4

=item *

Removed redundant C<dSP> from an example.

=back

=head3 L<perltie>

=over 4

=item *

Updated documentation of C<scalar(%hash)>.  See L</scalar(%hash) return
value changed> above.

=back

=head3 L<perldata>

=over 4

=item *

Use of single character variables, with the variable name a non printable
character in the range \x80-\xFF is no longer allowed. Update the docs to
reflect this.

=item *

Updated documentation of C<scalar(%hash)>.  See L</scalar(%hash) return
value changed> above.

=item *

Described the L<Moderately Restrictive level|http://www.unicode.org/reports/tr39/#General_Security_Profile> for unicode identifiers.

=item *

Added new cperl v5.25.2c restrictions for L<perldata/Identifier parsing>:
No undeclared mixed scripts, normalization to NFC and no binary symbols.

=back

=head3 L<perlexperiment> and L<perlref>

=over 4

=item *

Documented new feature: See L</Declaring a reference to a variable> above.

Document removed experiments: L<perlsub/Lexical Subroutines> is now default.
C<Array and hash container functions accept references> removed.

=back

=head3 L<perlfunc>

=over 4

=item *

Defined on aggregates is no longer allowed. Perlfunc was still reporting it as
deprecated, and that it will be deleted in the future.

=item *

Clarified documentation of L<C<seek()>|perlfunc/seek>,
L<C<tell()>|perlfunc/tell> and L<C<sysseek()>|perlfunc/sysseek>.
L<[perl #128607]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128607>

=item *

Removed obsolete documentation of L<C<study()>|perlfunc/study>.

=back

=head3 L<perlunicode>

=over 4

=item *

Documented change to C<\p{I<script>}> to now use the improved Script_Extensions
property.  See L</Use of \p{script} uses the improved Script_Extensions
property> above.

=item *

Updated the text to correspond with changes in Unicode UTS#18, concerning
regular expressions, and Perl compatibility with what it says.

=back

=head3 L<perlvar>

=over 4

=item *

Removed obsolete documentation of C<${^ENCODING}>.  See L</${^ENCODING} has
been removed> above.

=back

=head3 L<perlcommunity>

=over 4

=item *

All references to Usenet have been removed.

=back

=head3 L<perldelta>

=over 4

=item *

All references to Usenet have been removed.

=back

=head3 L<perllocale>

=over 4

=item *

Document NUL collation handling.

=back

=head3 L<perlmodinstall>

=over 4

=item *

All references to Usenet have been removed.

=back

=head3 L<perlmodlib>

=over 4

=item *

Updated the mirror list.

=item *

All references to Usenet have been removed.

=back

=head3 L<perlnewmod>

=over 4

=item *

All references to Usenet have been removed.

=back

=head3 L<perlintern> and L<perlapi>

=over 4

=item *

Added documentation for all F<op> functions.

=back

=head3 L<perlsec>

=over 4

=item *

Describe the L<perlsec/"Taint mode"> differences (I<hash keys, use re
'taint'>), added a L<perlsec/"use warnings 'security'"> paragraph.

=item *

For hashes describe the different B<PERL_PERTURB_TOP> strategy
regarding B<Bucket Order Perturbance>, add more text to
L<perlsec/"Alternative Hash Functions"> and add a new L<perlsec/"cperl
hash security"> paragraph.

=back

=head1 Diagnostics

The following additions or changes have been made to diagnostic output,
including warnings and fatal error messages.  For the complete list of
diagnostic messages, see L<perldiag>.

=head2 New Diagnostics

Added a new warnings category B<security> which is default ON,
using a special message.

A "SECURITY: " prefix, and as suffix the username, REMOTE_ADDR, full
pathname to implement a service similar to fail2ban.  Bypass
C<$SIG{__WARN__}> handlers.  Prints to STDERR and if available to
syslog.

A new C<-Dmv> debugging mode for verbose arena memory debugging was added,
similar to C<-Dm> and C<env PERL_MEM_LOG=s>.

=head3 New Errors

=over 4

=item *

The L<Too many elements|perldiag/"Too many elements"> error is now
triggered when accessing or extending an out of bounds array index or
trying to insert too many hash keys. This is to prevent from silent
hash or array overflows. Previously extending a hash beyond it's
capable size was silently ignored, leading to performance degradation
with overly high fill factors and extending an array failed only on
memory exhaustion, but the signed index led to an index overflow
between I32 and U32, resp.  I64 and U64.

Even worse, accessing overflown unsigned array indices would silently
access the signed counterpart, indices at the end.

Note that the out of bound error message with shaped arrays is different.

=item *

The L<Panic: hash key too long|perldiag/"panic: hash key too long (%u)">
error is now thrown with overlarge hash keys in every
C<hv_common> access and in L<Cpanel::JSON::XS>.  perl5 still silently
ignores those failures, and truncates the keys.

Many more similar C<panic: (file|keyword|mro|stash)? name too long> errors
were added to the parser, compiler and runtime to protect from overlong names
(> I32_MAX, 2147483647, 2GB), or counts.

=item *

Invalid for range iterator (%d .. %d)

(F) A range with constant integers as a for loop cannot be reversed.

We check now at compile-time that a range with C<for> loops with
constant integers is incremental, the 2nd number must be higher. We
don't support reverse loops with ranges, i.e. C<for (9..0)> is
invalid, but C<for (0..$#ary)> with C<$#ary> being C<-1> is valid.

Reverse constant strings ranges are still valid and lead to an empty
loop.  i.e. C<for ('z'..'a')> is currently valid.

=item *

Using the empty pattern (which re-executes the last successfully-matched
pattern) inside a code block in another regex, as in C</(?{ s!!new! })/>, has
always previously yielded a segfault. It now produces an error:
L<Infinite recursion via empty pattern|perldiag/"Infinite recursion via empty pattern">,
(was C<Use of the empty pattern inside of a regex code block is forbidden>).

=item *

L<The experimental declared_refs feature is not enabled|perldiag/"The experimental declared_refs feature is not enabled">

(F) To declare references to variables, as in C<my \%x>, you must first enable
the feature:

    no warnings "experimental::declared_refs";
    use feature "declared_refs";

=item *

L<Version control conflict marker|perldiag/"Version control conflict marker">

=item *

L<Unescaped left brace in regex is deprecated here, passed through in regex; marked by S<<-- HERE> in mE<sol>%sE<sol>|perldiag/"Unescaped left brace in regex is deprecated here, passed through in regex; marked by S<<-- HERE> in m/%s/">

Unescaped left braces are already illegal in some contexts in regular
expression patterns, but, due to an oversight, no deprecation warning
was raised in other contexts where they are intended to become illegal.
This warning is now raised in these contexts.

=item *

L<Malformed UTF-8 character in compose (empty string)|perldiag/"Malformed UTF-8 character in compose (empty string)">

L<Malformed UTF-8 character in decompose (empty string)|perldiag/"Malformed UTF-8 character in compose (empty string)">

L<Malformed UTF-8 character in reorder (empty string)|perldiag/"Malformed UTF-8 character in compose (empty string)">

New unicode identifier normalization errors.

=back

=head3 New Warnings

=over 4

=item *

The new C<S security> warning "Hash flood" was added.
See L</"Protect and warn on hash flood DoS">.

=item *

The new C<S security> warnings "metasploit reverse/bind shell payload"
and "CVE-2012-1823 reverse/bind shell payload" were added, detecting
the existing metasploit/libxploit and phpcgi CVE-2012-1823 reverse and
bind shells.  See L</"Warn on metasploit reverse shells">

=item *

L<Declaring references is experimental|perldiag/"Declaring references is experimental">

(S experimental::declared_refs) This warning is emitted if you use a reference
constructor on the right-hand side of C<my()>, C<state()>, C<our()>, or
C<local()>.  Simply suppress the warning if you want to use the feature, but
know that in doing so you are taking the risk of using an experimental feature
which may change or be removed in a future Perl version:

    no warnings "experimental::declared_refs";
    use feature "declared_refs";
    $fooref = my \$foo;

=item *

L<Invalid script %s in identifier for U+%04|perldiag/"Invalid script %s in identifier for U+%04">

=item *

L<Invalid \0 character in string for SYMBOL: %s|perldiag/"Invalid \0 character in string for SYMBOL: %s">

=item *

L<Invalid script %s in identifier, cannot be mixed with %s|perldiag/"Invalid script %s in identifier, cannot be mixed with %s">

=back

=head2 Changes to Existing Diagnostics

As of Perl 5.25.9, all new deprecations will come with a version in
which the feature will disappear. And with a few exceptions, most
existing deprecations will state when they'll disappear. As such, most
deprecation messages have changed.

=over 4

=item *

Improve error for missing tie() package/method. This brings the error messages
in line with the ones used for normal method calls, despite not using
call_method().

=item *

Make the sysread()/syswrite/() etc :utf8 handle warnings default. These
warnings were under 'deprecated' previously.

=item *

'do' errors now refer to 'do' (not 'require').

=item *

Details as to the exact problem have been added to the diagnostics that
occur when malformed UTF-8 is encountered when trying to convert to a
code point.

=item *

Executing C<undef $x> where C<$x> is tied or magical no longer incorrectly
blames the variable for an uninitialized-value warning encountered by the
tied/magical code.

=item *

L<Unescaped left brace in regex is illegal here in regex; marked by S<<-- HERE> in mE<sol>%sE<sol>|perldiag/"Unescaped left brace in regex is illegal here in regex; marked by S<<-- HERE> in m/%s/">

The word "here" has been added to the message that was raised in
v5.25.1.  This is to indicate that there are contexts in which unescaped
left braces are not (yet) illegal.

=back

=head1 Configuration and Compilation

All changes but default_inc_excludes_do are cperl-only.

=over 4

=item sysincpath, syslibpth

Those two new Config keys are needed for properly identifying the true
compiler header and library search paths. The old libpth just assumed
paths based in the calculated incpth. Several compilers have not
matching search paths, which lead to wrong precedence orderings of
e.g. F</usr/local/> vs F</opt/local>, conflicting in ccflags and
ldflags.  syslibpth is now computed.  The new keys don't add extra
ccflags or ldflags directcories if they already exist in the compiler
search paths. See [cperl #267] for more.
Note that this doesn't fix other ordering issues, as -I and -L is evaluated
before the system search paths.

This fixes serious problems with updated libraries in F</usr/local/lib>
on macports, but probably everywhere with bad compiler search paths.

=item rebuild_storable

Added a post-dynamic rule for Storable, to probe for the max. stacksize
and re-compile it with that.

=item dlopen

Fixed B<dlopen> probe and compilation with c++.

The dlopen probe with C++ needs C<-fPIC -shared>, otherwise
C<dlopen()> will not be found. This will set C<ld=ld>, leading to the
problem below:

=item ld

C<ld -f> may not be used without C<-shared>

Check C<ld=ld> (caused by the failing dlopen probe from above) and
C<ldflags> without C<-shared> and disable adding C<-fstack-protector> to it.

=item default_inc_excludes_do

Added C<default_inc_excludes_dot> to C<perl -V> and F<myconfig>.

=item arflags

Probe for arflags, which do support C<D> for deterministic static archives
without member timestamps. On darwin we currently only have F<llvm-ar-mp-3.9>
(since 3.7) which does support this.

ranlib is probed for the C<-D> flag for reproducible build determinism.

=item fixed longdblinfbytes probe

With Intel long double it didn't clean random excess garbage bytes
after the 10th byte.

=item cperl build helper scripts

Added the following release scripts to F<Porting:> F<do-conf-clean>
F<do-conf-cperl-release> F<do-make-cperl-release>
F<do-make-srctarball> F<perl_version> for Linux (debian and rpm) and
Darwin.

Those builds are now reproducible, see below.

=item reproducible builds

cperl has now support for automatic reproducible builds on most platforms.
A new B<cf_epoch> config key was added.

The config key B<cf_time> is now based on: 1. SOURCE_DATE_EPOCH,
2. with .git the newest file in the repository, or 3. the newest file
in the MANIFEST.

Builds are done with C<LC_ALL=C> and C<PERL_HASH_SEED=0>, but builds are still
LANGUAGE or compiler specific.

Those builds are reproducible when done on the same machine and user.
Otherwise set the keys: cf_by, cf_email, mydomain, myhostname, myuname also.

See L<[cperl #169]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/169>.

=item passcat

This suspicious Config key was removed from cperl.
If you have a NIS database use C<ypcat passwd>.
passcat is not used in any public CPAN module.

=item fake_signatures

Ask for L<fake_signatures> being compiled in as default or not.
Defaults to yes with cperl, no without. Sets C<$Config{fake_signatures}>
and defines C<PERL_FAKE_SIGNATURE>.

=item d_llabs

Probe for C<llabs()> needed for PERL_IABS on 32bit with -Duse64bitint,
the default on mingw/cygwin. Defines C<HAS_LLABS>.

=item d_setenv

Probe for C<setenv()> needed on some platforms with strict linkage or
C<-fvisibility=hidden>.

=item d_attribute_always_inline

Probe for C<__attribute__((always_inline))>, which is helpful with
C<clang -flto=thin> for exported mathoms (b) and inlined functions.

The problem is that  C<__attribute__((used))> functions are not inlined.
With always_inline + global visibility, but not C<__attribute__((used))>
we get inlined variants plus exported copies for the API.
Add C<PERL_MATHOM_CALLCONV> to use it.

=item sanitize_address

Added a new C<sanitize_address> config entry and probe, and matching
C<USE_SANITIZE_ADDRESS> F<config.h> definition.

=item d_attribute_used

Added a new C<d_attribute_used> config entry and probe, and matching
C<HASATTRIBUTE_USED> F<config.h> definition.

=item i_netinet_in_systm

Added a new C<i_netinet_in_systm> config entry and probe, and matching
F<config.h> define for L<Socket>.

=item i_netinet6_in6

Removed the C<i_netinet6_in6> Config entry and probe, and matching
C<I_NETINET6_I6> F<config.h> define, which was a typo.
This was added with cperl-5.22.2 and was never used due to the typo.
It cannot be used due to RFC 2553.

=item d_builtin_prefetch

Fixed the C<__builtin_prefetch> probe, not yet used.

=item d_builtin_ctz

Added a new C<__builtin_ctz> probe, C<$Config{d_builtin_ctz} key>,
used for faster C<DO_HSPLIT()> calculations. About 30% faster for hash
intensive tests.

=back

=head1 Testing

=over 4

=item *

Fixed F<t/re/regexp.t> handling of compile-time errors, if combined
with other result flags. cperl only.

=item *

Added F<t/comp/parser_run.t> for parser tests requiring F<test.pl>.

=item *

Added F<t/lib/warnings/toke_l1> for toke warnings tests with binary characters.

=item *

Added F<t/porting/embedcpp.t> to check for perl.h C++ compatibility
with a modern C++ compiler. There must be no fatal compilation errors
in the C<-c> step from C++ incompatibilities in any perl header file.

Note that Microsoft Visual C++ still throws errors. You cannot use that yet.
See L<[cperl #227]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/227>.

This is related to the new C<-Wc++11-compat> and C<-fpermissive> fixes.
cperl only.

=item *

C<make minitest> has been vastly improved.
cperl only.

=item *

Fix tests for the optional C<-DNODEFAULT_SHAREKEYS> configuration.
cperl only.

=item *

Relax some timing sensitive smoker failures on overly slow systems,
such as darwin on Travis with DEBUGGING.
cperl only.

Time-HiRes: skip nanosleep test,

Sys-Syslog with not responding syslogd.

=back

=head1 Utility Changes

=head2 L<c2ph>

=over 4

=item *

Removed all the old C<'> package seperators, and lexicalized most
internal variables from B<c2ph>. But it is not yet completely strict
safe.  See L</Removed ' as package seperator> and L<[cperl
#217]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/217>.

=back

=head1 Platform Support

=head2 Platform-Specific Notes

=over 4

=item Windows

=over 4

=item *

Support for compiling perl on Windows using Microsoft Visual Studio 2015
(containing Visual C++ 14.0) has been added.

This version of VC++ includes a completely rewritten C run-time library, some
of the changes in which mean that work done to resolve a socket close() bug in
L<[perl #120091|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=120091>
and L<[perl #118059|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=118059>
is not workable in its current state with this
version of VC++.  Therefore, we have effectively reverted that bug fix for
VS2015 onwards on the basis that being able to build with VS2015 onwards is
more important than keeping the bug fix.  We may revisit this in the future to
attempt to fix the bug again in a way that is compatible with VS2015.

These changes do not affect compilation with GCC or with Visual Studio versions
up to and including VS2013, i.e. the bug fix is retained (unchanged) for those
compilers.

Note that you may experience compatibility problems if you mix a perl built
with GCC or VS E<lt>= VS2013 with XS modules built with VS2015, or if you mix a
perl built with VS2015 with XS modules built with GCC or VS E<lt>= VS2013.
Some incompatibility may arise because of the bug fix that has been reverted
for VS2015 builds of perl, but there may well be incompatibility anyway because
of the rewritten CRT in VS2015 (e.g. see discussion at
L<http://stackoverflow.com/questions/30412951>).

=item *

Tweaks for Win32 VC vs GCC detection makefile code. This fixes issue that CCHOME
depends on CCTYPE, which in auto detect mode is set after CCHOME, so CCHOME uses
the uninit CCTYPE var. Also fix else vs .ELSE in makefile.mk

=item *

Fix some breakage, add 'undef' value for default_inc_excludes_dot in build
scripts.

=item *

Preserve the C<Systemroot> env var during env wipe for Win32 in F<t/op/magic.t>

This fixes a test fail with VC 2005 and VC 2008 on WinXP. The
C<Systemroot> env var is required on WinXP to load SXS tracked DLLs,
VC 2005 and 2008's MS libc's are SXS tracked (before and after are
not), so once %ENV is wiped and systemroot is deleted the C<require
Win32> cant load the XS DLL because the XS DLL is linked against the
SXS tracked libc specific to 2005/2008.

L<[perl #126041]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=126041>

=item *

Added strupr() and more ENV_IS_CASELESS helper functions for non-Win32/Netware
builds with ENV_IS_CASELESS being defined to easier test caseless windows ENV
handling on non-windows platforms.

=item *

fp definitions have been updated.

=back

=item Mingw

=over 4

=item *

Compilation under mingw (32 and/or 64bit) was fixed by removing a
duplicate F<pp_sys.c> entry in F<win32/GNUMakefile>.

=back

=item Linux

=over 4

=item *

Drop support for Linux a.out Linux has used ELF for over twenty years.

=item *

Check for null in pp_ghostent et al.

On some platforms (such as Gentoo Linux with torsocks),
hent->h_aliases (where hent is a struct hostent *) may be null after a
gethostent call.

L<RT#128740|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128740>

=back

=item VMS

=over 4

=item *

The path separator for the C<PERL5LIB> and C<PERLLIB> environment entries is
now a colon (C<:>) when running under a Unix shell. There is no change when
running under DCL (it's still C<|>).

=item *

Remove some VMS-specific hacks from C<showlex.t>. These were added 15 years
ago, and are no longer necessary for any VMS version now supported.

=item *

Move _pDEPTH and _aDEPTH after config.h otherwise DEBUGGING may not be defined
yet.

=item *

VAXC has not been a possibility for a good long while, and the versions of the
DEC/Compaq/HP/VSI C compiler that report themselves as "DEC" in a listing file
are 15 years or more out-of-date and can be safely desupported.

=item *

Fix some breakage, add 'undef' value for default_inc_excludes_dot in build
scripts.

=back

=item Hurd

The hints for Hurd have been improved enabling malloc wrap and reporting the
GNU libc used (previously it was an empty string when reported).
L<[perl #128954]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128954>

=item VAX

VAX floating point formats are now supported.

=item FreeBSD

=over 4

=item *

Similar to darwin with v5.25.2c the C<do_open> and C<do_close> macros
are now undefined on clang++, which FreeBSD uses. do_close clashes on
C++ with F<locale>. We need to use the fullname B<Perl_do_open> and
B<Perl_do_close> functions whenever perl needs to be embedded into C++
projects.  See L<[cperl #227]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/227>

Also affected is F<modperl_io.c>, which is not used with C++.

=item *

F<t/uni/overload.t>: Skip hanging test on FreeBSD.

=back

=item Darwin/macOS

=over 4

=item *

Fixed setting C<MACOSX_DEPLOYMENT_TARGET=10.3> for OS X 10.3.x - 10.5.x.
This is irrelevant for cperl since cperl uses ldflags and cflags
C<-mmacosx-version-min=10.x>

=item *

Don't treat -Dprefix=/usr as special, instead require an extra option
-Ddarwin_distribution to produce the same results.

=item *

OS X El Capitan doesn't implement the clock_gettime() or clock_getres() APIs,
emulate them as necessary.

=item *

Deprecated syscall(2) on macOS 10.12.

=back

=item EBCDIC

Several tests have been updated to work (or be skipped) on EBCDIC platforms.

=item HP-UX

L<Net::Ping> UDP test is skipped on HP-UX.

=item OpenBSD 6

OpenBSD 6 still does not support returning pid, gid or uid with SA_SIGINFO.
Make sure this is accounted for.

=item Solaris

With the SunPro cc compiler we use now the C<__global> declaration
for exported functions, similar to Windows C<__declspec(dllexport)>.

This is hidden under the new C<GLOBAL> macro.

=back

=head1 Internal Changes

=over 4

=item *

Fixed many instances of wrong or missing dVAR declarations, relevant for
C<-Accflags=-DPERL_GLOBAL_STRUCT_PRIVATE>.

=item *

The C<op_class()> API function has been added. This is like the existing
C<OP_CLASS()> macro, but can more accurately determine what struct an op
has been allocated as. For example C<OP_CLASS()> might return
C<OA_BASEOP_OR_UNOP> indicating that ops of this type are usually
allocated as an C<OP> or C<UNOP>; while C<op_class()> will return
C<OPclass_BASEOP> or C<OPclass_UNOP> as appropriate.

=item *

The output format of the C<op_dump()> function (as used by C<perl -Dx>)
has changed: it now displays an "ASCII-art" tree structure, and shows more
low-level details about each op, such as its address and class.

The initial indent level is controlled by the global C<PL_dumpindent>,
which is 4, and in Devel::Peek and B::C set to 2.  With cperl the
indent-level between the ops is hardcoded to 2, in perl5 to 4.

=item *

The lexer F<toke.c> is now guaranteed to work on a C<linestr> buffer
SV with minimal PTRSIZE (4 or 8 byte) length, which enables to use
fast word-wise comparison memcmp builtins. cperl only.

=item *

The B<negate> op has now it's own B<ck_negate> callback.

=item *

Forbid attaching magic to 4 builtin SV sentinels.

The unique sv_undef, sv_yes, sv_no and sv_placeholder SV values are compared by
pointer. Adding magic to it will break that and is now silently skipped.
If you need to magicalize sv_yes or sv_no, turn it into a normal IV before.

=item *

New public SV_YES and SV_NO macros were added, representing &PL_sv_yes
and &PL_sv_no, plus new macros for CORE only: UNDEF and
PLACEHOLDER. They cannot be used in headers, as they are used with
extensions also.

=item *

Two internal debugging helpers C<av_dump> and C<hv_dump> had been added,
to print all array elements and hash keys (and optional values).

=item *

New versions of macros like C<isALPHA_utf8> and C<toLOWER_utf8>  have
been added, each with the
suffix C<_safe>, like C<isSPACE_utf8_safe>.  These take an extra
parameter, giving an upper limit of how far into the string it is safe
to read.  Using the old versions could cause attempts to read beyond the
end of the input buffer if the UTF-8 is not well-formed, and ther use
now raises a deprecation warning.  Details are at
L<perlapi/Character classification>.

=item *

Calling macros like C<isALPHA_utf8> on malformed UTF-8 have issued a
deprecation warning since Perl v5.18.  They now die.
Similarly, macros like C<toLOWER_utf8> on malformed UTF-8 now die.

=item *

Calling the functions C<utf8n_to_uvchr> and its derivatives, while
passing a string length of 0 is now asserted against in DEBUGGING
builds, and otherwise returns the Unicode REPLACEMENT CHARACTER.   If
you have nothing to decode, you shouldn't call the decode function.

=item *

The functions C<utf8n_to_uvchr> and its derivatives now return the
Unicode REPLACEMENT CHARACTER if called with UTF-8 that has the overlong
malformation, and that malformation is allowed by the input parameters.
This malformation is where the UTF-8 looks valid syntactically, but
there is a shorter sequence that yields the same code point.  This has
been forbidden since Unicode version 3.1.

=item *

The functions C<utf8n_to_uvchr> and its derivatives now accept an input
flag to allow the overflow malformation.  This malformation is when the
UTF-8 may be syntactically valid, but the code point it represents is
not capable of being represented in the word length on the platform.
What "allowed" means in this case is that the function doesn't return an
error, and advances the parse pointer to beyond the UTF-8 in question,
but it returns the Unicode REPLACEMENT CHARACTER as the value of the
code point (since the real value is not representable).

=item *

The meanings of some internal SV flags have been changed

OPpRUNTIME, SVpbm_VALID, SVpbm_TAIL, SvTAIL_on, SvTAIL_off, SVrepl_EVAL,
SvEVALED

=item *

Change C<hv_fetch(…, "…", …, …)> to C<hv_fetchs(…, "…", …)>

The dual-life dists all use Devel::PPPort, so they can use this function even
though it was only added in 5.10.

=item *

The function C<L<perlapi/utf8n_to_uvchr>> has been changed to not
abandon searching for other malformations when the first one is
encountered.  A call to it thus can generate multiple diagnostics,
instead of just one.

=item *

A new function, C<L<perlapi/utf8n_to_uvchr_error>>, has been added for
use by modules that need to know the details of UTF-8 malformations
beyond pass/fail.  Previously, the only ways to know why a sequence was
ill-formed was to capture and parse the generated diagnostics, or to do
your own analysis.

=item *

Several new functions for handling Unicode have been added to the API:
C<L<perlapi/is_strict_utf8_string>>,
C<L<perlapi/is_c9strict_utf8_string>>,
C<L<perlapi/is_utf8_string_flags>>,
C<L<perlapi/is_strict_utf8_string_loc>>,
C<L<perlapi/is_strict_utf8_string_loclen>>,
C<L<perlapi/is_c9strict_utf8_string_loc>>,
C<L<perlapi/is_c9strict_utf8_string_loclen>>,
C<L<perlapi/is_utf8_string_loc_flags>>,
C<L<perlapi/is_utf8_string_loclen_flags>>,
C<L<perlapi/is_utf8_fixed_width_buf_flags>>,
C<L<perlapi/is_utf8_fixed_width_buf_loc_flags>>,
C<L<perlapi/is_utf8_fixed_width_buf_loclen_flags>>.

These functions are all extensions of the C<is_utf8_string_*()> functions,
that apply various restrictions to the UTF-8 recognized as valid.

=item *

A new API function C<sv_setvpv_bufsize()> allows simultaneously setting the
length and allocated size of the buffer in an C<SV>, growing the buffer if
necessary.

=item *

A new API macro C<SvPVCLEAR()> sets its C<SV> argument to an empty string,
like Perl-space C<$x = ''>, but with several optimisations.

=item *

All parts of the internals now agree that the C<sassign> op is a C<BINOP>;
previously it was listed as a C<BASEOP> in F<regen/opcodes>, which meant
that several parts of the internals had to be special-cased to accommodate
it. This oddity's original motivation was to handle code like C<$x ||= 1>;
that is now handled in a simpler way.

=item *

Several new internal C macros have been added that take a string literal as
arguments, alongside existing routines that take the equivalent value as two
arguments, a character pointer and a length. The advantage of this is that
the length of the string is calculated automatically, rather than having to
be done manually. These routines are now used where appropriate across the
entire codebase.

Note that these upstream changes are still inferior to the cperl specific
memEQc and strEQc macros, which do faster word-wordwise comparisons at
run-time.

=item *

The code in F<gv.c> that determines whether a variable has a special meaning
to Perl has been simplified.

=item *

The C<DEBUGGING>-mode output for regex compilation and execution has been
enhanced.

=item *

Several macros and functions have been added to the public API for
dealing with Unicode and UTF-8-encoded strings.  See
L<perlapi/Unicode Support>.

=item *

Use C<my_strlcat()> in C<locale.c>. While C<strcat()> is safe in this context,
some compilers were optimizing this to C<strcpy()> causing a porting test to
fail that looks for unsafe code. Rather than fighting this, we just use
C<my_strlcat()> instead.

=item *

Perl no longer panics when switching into some locales on machines with
buggy C<strxfrm()> implementations in their libc.
L<[perl #121734]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=121734>

=item *

Support for clang C<-flto> and the new C<-flto=thin> optimization was
added, via C<GLOBAL> declaration and C<__attribute__global__> for
global visibility for all exported API functions, even if not used,
and C<-DLTO>. Note that is not needed for C<gcc -flto>, and the clang
variant produces slower code.

Rudimentary support for C<-fsanitize=cfi> was also added, which is
safer than the old C<-fstack-protector-strong>, but this is not yet
finished.

L<ExtUtils::ParseXS> adds now a correct visibility declaration of
C<XS_EXTERNAL> for C<-flto> and C<-fvisibility=hidden>, which is needed for
C<-fsanitize=cfi> support.

C<Perl_xs_handshake> is now properly exported, which is needed for
C<clang -flto=thin>.

=item *

C<XS_EXTERNAL> and C<XSPROTO> were simplified to use the new C<GLOBAL>
declaration and C<__attribute__global__> attribute, for easier
platform abstractions.

=item *

Added many OP read-write field accessor macros, like C<OpFIRST>,
C<OpLAST>, C<OpOTHER>, C<OpKIDS>, C<OpSPECIAL>, C<OpSTACKED>,
C<OpDEREF>, C<OpWANT_VOID>, C<OpWANT_SCALAR>, C<OpWANT_LIST>.  And
shorter type checks: C<IS_TYPE>, C<ISNT_TYPE>, C<NO_OP_TYPE_OR_WASNT>.

rpeep uses now consistently the local C<o>, and not the global
C<PL_op> variable.
See L<[cperl #219]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/219>.

=item *

L<perlapi/repeatcpy> changed the type of the 4th count argument from IV to UV.

=item *

Added a new L<perlapi/newPADNAMEpvn_flags> function which disables UTF8 via
C<flags> of C<0>, a new L<perlapi/PadnameUTF8> macro, and new C<PADNAMEt_UTF8>
and C<padadd_UTF8> bits.

=item *

The maximal size of hashes has been reduced from 63 bit back to 32 bit
on 64-bit systems, as with perl5 upstream and as with cperl-5.22. The
only problem with 63 bit was the performance overhead of having to
calculate 64-bit hashes for each string, which was not worth it. For
overlarge hashes use tie to an external library which handle bigger
sizes and external maps.

This affects C<xhv_keys>, C<xhv_max>, C<xhv_riter>, C<xhv_fill_lazy>,
placeholders and the return values and arguments of most C<hv_>
functions and macros.  C<xhv_riter> is now a full C<U32>, thus the
previous tombstone value C<-1> is now C<U32_MAX>, so contrary to perl5
you can still iterate over the full keys range, and not just the half
of it.

=item *

C<PL_maxo> is now tracked/incremented in C<custom_op_register()>.

The static number of OPs is determined by the static C<MAXO>
definition, but users can add custom ops.

Note that perl5.25.4 removes the dynamic part C<maxo>.
We find it useful, as only C<maxo> returns the number of current ops.

=item *

C<HVhek_MASK> is now only 0x03, sames as C<HVhek_ENABLEHVKFLAGS>, which is
not needed anymore.

C<HVhek_MASK> is only needed during hash collision comparisons.
There we only need the 2 HEK UTF8 bits: C<HVhek_UTF8> and C<HVhek_WASUTF8>,
but not the 3 others: UNSHARED, TAINTED, STATIC. (the 2 last being
cperl-only)

=back

=head1 Selected Bug Fixes

=over 4

=item No double-free of $_ in loops

Fixed L<[perl #131101]|https://rt.perl.org/Ticket/Display.html?id=131101>
crash with something like

  map /x/g, (%h = ("y", 0)), (%h = ("y", 0))

cperl-only

=item packaging: protect sitelib dirs from being uninstalled

The cperl packaging recipe in F<do-make-cperl-release> allowed empty
directories to be created, which is a huge problem with debian/rpm like
installations, potentially removing all files and subdirectories
manually installed via cpan into sitelib and sitearch when updating or
removing the package.

=item type-check list assignments and types

These list assignments now properly type check:

  package Bla;
  my Bla @a;
  my int $i = $a[0];
  # => Type of scalar assignment to $i must be int (not Bla)
  $i = shift @a;
  # => Type of scalar assignment to $i must be int (not Bla)

  # implicit shift
  (my int $j) = @a;
  # => Type of list assignment to $j must be int (not Bla)

i.e. we descend into many list (array/hash) ops. mderef not yet.

Also more builtin variables are now type-checked, such as C<@ARGV>
as C<:Array(:Str)>
and as C<:Str> C<$ARGV>, C<$0> and C<$^X>. Previously only C<$^O>.
These added types do now more internal type optimizations, e.g. using
C<s_eq> instead of the generic C<eq> when comparing with constants.

See L<[cperl #258]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/258>.

=item -d with tailcalls

Implemented a workaround for the debugger (C<-d>) to step into
most functions with signatures. Until the root cause with debugging
tailcalls is fixed, we convert back a signature to old-style
assignments under the debugger.
This was the only perl5 regression.
See L<[cperl #167]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/167>.

=item Restore C++ compatibility

perl5 is compileable with recent C++ compilers, but cperl since v5.24.0c not so.
We fixed more wrong goto's and wrong const declarations leading to C++
errors with C<-fpermissive>, which is basically used as stricter C mode.

E.g. error: invalid conversion from 'const HEK* {aka const hek*}' to
'HEK* {aka hek*} [-fpermissive].
error: jump to label 'float_ipow'. crosses initialization of 'unsigned int diff'

Regression since v5.24.0c, a cperl problem only.
L<[cperl #224]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/224>

=item C<$-{$name}> leak

C< $-{$name} > would leak an C<AV> on each access if the regular
expression had no named captures.  The same applies to access to any
hash tied with L<Tie::Hash::NamedCapture> and C<< all => 1 >>.
L<[perl #130822]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=130822>

=item split ' ' under use unicode_strings

C<split ' '> now handles the argument being split correctly when in the
scope of the L<< C<unicode_strings>|feature/"The 'unicode_strings' feature"
>> feature. Previously, when a string using the single-byte internal
representation contained characters that are whitespace by Unicode rules but
not by ASCII rules, it treated those characters as part of fields rather
than as field separators. This resolves
L<[perl #130907]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=130907>.

=item Fix $# use after free or buffer overflow

Attempting to use the deprecated variable C<$#> as the object in an
indirect object method call could cause a heap use after free or
buffer overflow.
L<[perl #129274]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=129274>

=item Fix lexer with indirect object method calls

When checking for an indirect object method call in some rare cases
the parser could reallocate the line buffer but then continue to use
pointers to the old buffer.
L<[perl #129190]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=129190>

=item Forbid glob as format argument

Supplying a glob as the format argument to L<perlfunc/formline> would
cause an assertion failure.
L<[perl #130722]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=130722>

=item Fix optimized match to qr

Code like C< $value1 =~ qr/.../ ~~ $value2 > would have the match
converted into a qr// operator, leaving extra elements on the stack to
confuse any surrounding expression.
L<[perl #130705]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=130705>

=item Fix pad access in regex eval code blocks

Since 5.24.0 in some obscure cases, a regex which included code blocks
from multiple sources (e.g. via embedded via qr// objects) could end up
with the wrong current pad and crash or give weird results.
L<[perl #129881]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=129881>

=item Fix local in regex eval code blocks

Occasionally C<local()>s in a code block within a patterns weren't being
undone when the pattern matching backtracked over the code block.
L<[perl #126697]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=126697>

=item Fix substr with a magic variable

Using C<substr()> to modify a magic variable could access freed memory
in some cases.
L<[perl #129340]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=129340>

=item Fix some missing Malformed UTF-8 character warnings

Perl 5.25.9 was fixed so that under C<use utf8>, the entire Perl program
is checked that the UTF-8 is wellformed.  It turns out that several edge
cases were missed, and are now fixed.
L<[perl #126310]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=126310> was the original
ticket.

=item SvREADONLY_off: allow calls as argument

No multiple evaluation of its argument anymore.

=item ref assert

Fixed an assertion error with DEBUGGING builds in the C<ref> op, detected
with C<-T> in pod testing. Turn off taint magic for the return value
of C<ref> with fixed ref names.
L<[cperl #254]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/254>.

=item c3 linerarization

Fix c3 ISA linearization with deleted ISA elements, leaving "main" plus
an empty name.

    cperl -Mmro=c3 -e'
        @ISACLEAR::ISA=qw/XX YY ZZ/;
        $ISACLEAR::ISA[1]=undef;
        print join",",@{mro::get_linear_isa('ISACLEAR')}'
    => XX,main,,ZZ # wrong

L<[cperl #251]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/251>.

=item sv_dump

Fix and explain sv_dump (also via Devel::Peek Dump) that maxnested means
also maxelems, by printing now "... (skipping Elt 5-20)".
L<[cperl #243]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/243>.

=item use utf8

Under C<use utf8>, the entire Perl program is now checked that the
UTF-8 is wellformed.
L<[perl #126310]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=126310>.

=item SvIMMORTAL

Handle SvIMMORTALs in LHS of list assign.
L<[perl #129991]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=129991>

=item user-defined Unicode properties broke texinfo

L<[perl #130010]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=130010>
a5540cf breaks texinfo

This involved user-defined Unicode properties.

=item Fix error message for unclosed C<\N{> in regcomp.

An unclosed C<\N{> could give the wrong error message
C<"\N{NAME} must be resolved by the lexer">.

=item Fix scalar lvalues in list assignment

List assignment in list context where the LHS contained aggregates and
where there were not enough RHS elements, used to skip scalar lvalues.
Previously, C<(($a,$b,@c,$d) = (1))> in list context returned C<($a)>; now
it returns C<($a,$b,$d)>. C<(($a,$b,$c) = (1))> is unchanged: it still
returns C<($a,$b,$c)>. This can be seen in the following:

    sub inc { $_++ for @_ }
    inc(($a,$b,@c,$d) = (10))

Formerly, the values of C<($a,$b,$d)> would be left as C<(11,undef,undef)>;
now they are C<(11,1,1)>.

=item Fix /(?{ s!!! })/

L<[perl #129903]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=129903>

The basic problem is that code like this: /(?{ s!!! })/ can trigger infinite
recursion on the C stack (not the normal perl stack) when the last successful
pattern in scope is itself. Since the C stack overflows this manifests as an
untrappable error/segfault, which then kills perl.

We avoid the segfault by simply forbidding the use of the empty pattern when it
would resolve to the currently executing pattern.

=item Fix utf8 parsing

Avoid reading beyond the end of the line buffer when there's a
short UTF-8 character at the end.
L<[perl #128997]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128997>

=item  Fix firstchar bitmap under utf8 with prefix optimisation.

L<[perl #129950]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=129950>

=item F<Carp/t/arg_string.t>: be liberal in f/p formats.

L<[perl #129954]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=129954>

=item Make C<do "a\0b"> fail silently instead of throwing.

L<[perl #129928]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=129928>

=item Fix nested forward sub declarations

A sub containing a "forward" declaration with the same name (e.g.,
C<sub c { sub c; }>) could sometimes crash or loop infinitely.
L<[perl #129090]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=129090>

=item regex crash utf8 =~ utf8

A crash in executing a regex with a floating UTF-8 substring against a
target string that also used UTF-8 has been fixed.

L<[perl #129350]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=129350>

=item #!perl -i u vs. -u

Previously, a shebang line like C<#!perl -i u> could be erroneously
interpreted as requesting the C<-u> option. This has been fixed.

L<[perl #129336]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=129336>

=item Wrong regex backtracking

The regex engine was previously producing incorrect results in some rare
situations when backtracking past a trie that matches only one thing; this
showed up as capture buffers (C<$1>, C<$2>, etc) erroneously containing data
from regex execution paths that weren't actually executed for the final
match.  L<[perl #129897]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=129897>

=item regex_sets assertions

Certain regexes making use of the experimental C<regex_sets> feature could
trigger an assertion failure. This has been fixed.

L<[perl #129322]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=129322>

=item Invalid ref assignments

Invalid assignments to a reference constructor (e.g., C<\eval=time>) could
sometimes crash in addition to giving a syntax error.
L<[perl #125679]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=125679>

=item evalbytes bareword crash

The parser could sometimes crash if a bareword came after C<evalbytes>.
L<[perl #129196]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=129196>

=item Wrong Use of inherited AUTOLOAD for non-method warning

Autoloading via a method call would warn erroneously ("Use of inherited
AUTOLOAD for non-method") if there was a stub present in the package into
which the invocant had been blessed.  The warning is no longer emitted in
such circumstances.
L<[perl #47047]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=47047>

=item Fix crash with illegal splice

The use of C<splice> on arrays with nonexistent elements could cause other
operators to crash.
L<[perl #129164]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=129164>

=item Fix re_untuit_start overflow

Fixed case where C<re_untuit_start> will overshoot the length of a utf8
string. L<[perl #129012]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=129012>

=item Improve deb_stack_all

Handle C<CXt_SUBST> better in C<Perl_deb_stack_all>, previously it wasn't
checking that the I<current> C<cx> is the right type, and instead was always
checking the base C<cx> (effectively a noop).
L<[perl #129029]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=129029>

=item Fixed some UAF bugs in yylex

Fixed two possible use-after-free bugs in C<Perl_yylex>. C<Perl_yylex>
maintains up to two pointers into the parser buffer, one of which can
become stale under the right conditions.

L<[perl #129069]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=129069>

=item Fixed s///l crash with utf8

Fixed a crash with C<s///l> where it thought it was dealing with UTF-8
when it wasn't.
L<[perl #129038]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=129038>

=item Unexpected binary operator '+' with no preceding operand in regex

Fixed place where regex was not setting the syntax error correctly.
L<[perl #129122]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=129122>

=item Fixed &. assert with utf8 and missing nul byte

The C<&.> operator (and the C<&> operator, when it treats its arguments as
strings) were failing to append a trailing null byte if at least one string
was marked as utf8 internally.  Many code paths (system calls, regexp
compilation) still expect there to be a null byte in the string buffer
just past the end of the logical string.  An assertion failure was the
result.
L<[perl #129287]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=129287>

=item Check pack_sockaddr_un

Check C<pack_sockaddr_un()>'s return value because C<pack_sockaddr_un()>
silently truncates the supplied path if it won't fit into the C<sun_path>
member of C<sockaddr_un>. This may change in the future, but for now
check the path in theC<sockaddr> matches the desired path, and skip if
it doesn't.
L<[perl #128095]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128095>

=item Fix scan_heredoc

Make sure C<PL_oldoldbufptr> is preserved in C<scan_heredoc()>. In some
cases this is used in building error messages.
L<[perl #128988]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128988>

=item Fix IN_LC

Check for null PL_curcop in IN_LC()
L<[perl #129106]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=129106>

=item Fix parser error with :attr(foo

Fixed the parser error handling for an 'C<:attr(foo>' that does not have
an ending 'C<)>'.

=item Fix delimcpy

Fix C<Perl_delimcpy()> to handle a backslash as last char, this
actually fixed two bugs,
L<[perl #129064]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=129176> and
L<[perl #129176]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=129176>.

=item Fix gv_fetchmethod_pvn_flags seperator parsing

L<[perl #129267]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=129267>
rework gv_fetchmethod_pvn_flags separator parsing to
prevent possible string overrun with invalid len in gv.c

=item Fix some in-place array sorts cases

Problems with in-place array sorts: code like C<@a = sort { ... } @a>,
where the source and destination of the sort are the same plain array, are
optimised to do less copying around. Two side-effects of this optimisation
were that the contents of C<@a> as visible to to sort routine were
partially sorted, and under some circumstances accessing C<@a> during the
sort could crash the interpreter. Both these issues have been fixed, and
Sort functions see the original value of C<@a>.

=item Wrong Attempt to pack pointer to temporary value warning

C<pack("p", ...)> used to emit its warning ("Attempt to pack pointer to
temporary value") erroneously in some cases, but has been fixed.

=item Wrong used once warning in the debugger

C<@DB::args> is now exempt from "used once" warnings.  The warnings only
occurred under B<-w>, because F<warnings.pm> itself uses C<@DB::args>
multiple times.

=item Wrong Possible unintended interpolation... warnings

The use of built-in arrays or hash slices in a double-quoted string no
longer issues a warning ("Possible unintended interpolation...") if the
variable has not been mentioned before.  This affected code like
C<qq|@DB::args|> and C<qq|@SIG{'CHLD', 'HUP'}|>.  (The special variables
C<@-> and C<@+> were already exempt from the warning.)

=item Fixed gethostent checks for NUL bytes regression

C<gethostent> and similar functions now perform a null check internally, to
avoid crashing with torsocks.  This was a regression from 5.22.
L<[perl #128740]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128740>

=item Fix some defined typeglob leaks

C<defined *{'!'}>, C<defined *{'['}>, and C<defined *{'-'}> no longer leak
memory if the typeglob in question has never been accessed before.

=item fchown

In 5.25.4 C<fchown()> was changed not to accept negative one as an argument
because in some platforms that is an error.  However, in some other platforms
that is an acceptable argument.  This change has been reverted
L<[perl #128967]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128967>.

=item Wrong constant assertion with sub ub(){0} ub ub

Mentioning the same constant twice in a row (which is a syntax error) no
longer fails an assertion under debugging builds.  This was a regression
from 5.20.
L<[perl #126482]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=126482>

=item Many hexadecimal floating point printing fixes

Many issues relating to C<printf "%a"> of hexadecimal floating point
were fixed.  In addition, the "subnormals" (formerly known as "denormals")
floating point anumbers are now supported both with the plain IEEE 754
floating point numbers (64-bit or 128-bit) and the x86 80-bit
"extended precision".  Note that subnormal hexadecimal floating
point literals will give a warning about "exponent underflow".
L<[perl #128843]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128843>,
L<[perl #128889]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128889>,
L<[perl #128890]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128890>,
L<[perl #128893]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128893>,
L<[perl #128909]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128909>,
L<[perl #128919]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128919>.

=item tr/\N{U+...}/foo/ regression

A regression in 5.24 with C<tr/\N{U+...}/foo/> when the code point was
between 128 and 255 has been fixed.
L<[perl #128734]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128734>.

=item S__invlist_len assertion

A regression from the previous development release, 5.23.3, where
compiling a regular expression could crash the interpreter has been
fixed. L<[perl #128686]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128686>.

=item Invalid utf8 string delimiters

Use of a string delimiter whose code point is above 2**31 now works
correctly on platforms that allow this.  Previously, certain characters,
due to truncation, would be confused with other delimiter characters
with special meaning (such as C<?> in C<m?...?>), resulting
in inconsistent behaviour.  Note that this is non-portable,
and is based on Perl's extension to UTF-8, and is probably not
displayable nor enterable by any editor.
L<[perl #128738]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128738>

=item @{x\n crash

C<@{x> followed by a newline where C<x> represents a control or non-ASCII
character no longer produces a garbled syntax error message or a crash.
L<[perl #128951]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128951>

=item %: = 0 assertion

An assertion failure with C<%: = 0> has been fixed.
L<[perl #128238]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128238>

=item "$foo::$bar" vs "$foo\::$bar" 5.18 parsing regression

In Perl 5.18, the parsing of C<"$foo::$bar"> was accidentally changed, such
that it would be treated as C<$foo."::".$bar>.  The previous behavior, which
was to parse it as C<$foo:: . $bar>, has been restored.
L<[perl #128478]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128478>

=item -x off by one 5.20 regression

Since Perl 5.20, line numbers have been off by one when perl is invoked with
the B<-x> switch.  This has been fixed.
L<[perl #128508]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128508>

=item delete $My::{"Foo::"}; \&My::Foo::foo no longer crashes

Vivifying a subroutine stub in a deleted stash (e.g., C<delete $My::{"Foo::"};
\&My::Foo::foo>) no longer crashes.  It had begun crashing in Perl 5.18.
L<[perl #128532]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128532>

=item Wrong sub and filehandle deletion crashes

Some obscure cases of subroutines and file handles being freed at the
same time could result in crashes, but have been fixed.  The crash was
introduced in Perl 5.22. The cperl fix doesn't hurt run-time
performance as the perl5.26 fix does.
L<[perl #128597]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128597>

=item No $ISA[0][0] assertion

Code that looks for a variable name associated with an uninitialized value
could cause an assertion in cases where magic is involved, such as
C<$ISA[0][0]>.  This has now been fixed.
L<[perl #128253]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128253>

=item No Subroutine STASH::NAME redefined crash

A crash caused by code generating the warning "Subroutine STASH::NAME
redefined" in cases such as C<sub P::f{} undef *P::; *P::f =sub{};> has been
fixed.  In these cases, where the STASH is missing, the warning will now appear
as "Subroutine NAME redefined".
L<[perl #128257]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128257>

=item No format deprecation assertions

Fixed an assertion triggered by some code that handles deprecated behavior in
formats, e.g. in cases like this:

    format STDOUT =
    @
    0"$x"

L<[perl #128255]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128255>

=item Fixed divide by zero crash on windows with collate

A possible divide by zero in string transformation code on Windows has been
avoided, fixing a crash when collating an empty string.
L<[perl #128618]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128618>

=item Fixed assertions with /(?<=/ or /(?<!/

Some regular expression parsing glitches could lead to assertion failures with
regular expressions such as C</(?<=/> and C</(?<!/>.  This has now been fixed.
L<[perl #128170]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128170>

=item Non-ASCII string delimiters are now reported correctly in error messages
for unterminated strings

L<[perl #128701]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128701>

=item Allow lvalue keys %hash

Scalar C<keys %hash> can now be assigned to consistently in all scalar
lvalue contexts.  Previously it worked for some contexts but not others.

=item Fixed ${\vec %h, 0, 1}, ${\substr %h, 0}

C< ${\vec %h, 0, 1} > and C< ${\substr %h, 0} > do not segfault anymore, rather
the lvalue context is propagated, and list context properly handled.
L<[perl #128260]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128260>

=item Fixed the range unicode bug

When the right side of the range is a UTF-8 encoded
string, but the left side not, downgrade the right side to native octets.
E.g.

    my $r = chr 255; utf8::upgrade $r; my $num = ("a" .. $r);
    print $num

should print 26 but does 702, because the utf-8 repr. of C<\x{ff}>
is C<"\303\277" [UTF8 "\x{ff}"]>, and the range was incremented from
"a" to "\x{c3}\x{bf}" instead.
See L<[cperl #218]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/218>.

=item Fixed -Duseshrplib, a shared libcperl.$so

Fixed several issues with C<-Duseshrplib>, a shared F<libcperl.$so>:
install it (!!),
fix ExtUtils::Embed and B-C compilation and testing,
fix tests on darwin,
fix configuration probe of Term::ReadKey.

=item Fixed sv_dump of VALID,EVALED

Fixed C<sv_dump> of fbm-magic strings which did previously contain the wrong
"VALID,EVALED" string for a flag which is either VALID or EVALED. cperl only.

=item Fixed cperl signatures with default blocks

Fixed a cperl-only failure in signatures with default blocks introducing
a new lexical variable. As in
C<sub t151($a,$b=do{my $f},$c=1){} t151($x,$x,$x)>.
This failure was only fatal on 32bit + -Duse64bitint systems.

C<SIGNATURE_arg_default_op> does not have a items arg.
See L<[cperl #164]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/164>.
and L<[cperl #213]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/213>.

=item v-strings with a 'c' suffix can now be parsed natively

In C<scan_vstring()>.
See L<[cperl #211]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/211>.

=item More B<I32/IV/SSize_t fixes>

against huge data (2GB) overflows on 64bit.

We are now in a 64bit world and need to get rid of all the wrong
32bit (2GB) size limits.
Some of these fixes seem to be even security relevant, as in the last
2GB series from L<[cperl #123]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/123>.

chop/chomp of only half of overlarge arrays.

Or ~"a"x2G complement of overlarge strings, silently processing only
the half - as with overlong hash keys.

There was also a smartmatch Array - CodeRef rule, which passed only over
half the array elements.  The Hash part was also wrong, but the wrong number
was not used.

regex match group of >2GB string len.

Allow repeat count >2GB and don't silently cap it at IV_MAX. Which was
at least better then silent wrap around.

Missing optimization of inplace substitution via clen overflow.

=item Fixed several B<heap-buffer-overflows> detected by asan

use-after-free in Dynaloader (ReadKey probe with -DDEBUG_LEAKING_SCALAR),
heap-overflow in gv_fetchfile (t/comp/parser.t),
heap-overflow with signatures,
heap-overflow in XSLoader,
invalid memEQc in toke.c missing out on parsing #!perl -opts,
B-C global-buffer-overflow with dynamic COW strings, wrong savepvn args.

There are still heap-use-after-free problems with perlcc and
PERL_DESTRUCT_LEVEL=2.

See L<[cperl #207]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/207>

=item Fix -DNODEFAULT_SHAREKEYS regression from 5.9

Fixed overwriting the C<HVhek_UNSHARED> bit in the hash loop broken with
v5.9.

This fixed C<-DNODEFAULT_SHAREKEYS>. In the default configuration
without NODEFAULT_SHAREKEYS since 5.003_001 all hash keys are stored
twice, once in the hash and once again in C<PL_strtab>, the global
string table, with the benefit of faster hash loops and copies. Almost
all hashtables get the SHAREKEYS bit.
With C<-Accflags=-DNODEFAULT_SHAREKEYS> simple scripts are 20-30% faster.
L<[cperl #201]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/201>

=item Fix HEK_TAINTED check for HEf_SVKEY values

A HEf_SVKEY hek has no tainted flag, the pointed to SV has. This is a
cperl-only security feature.

=item Only clear LS_COLORS for glob

When miniperl calls csh to implement glob(), we cleared %ENV
temporarily to avoid csh dying on invalid values for things like
LS_COLORS.  That has proven to have far too many problems, since many
system-dependent env vars are necessary for calling an external
process.  See the
L<[perl #126041]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=126041>
ticket for details.

A better solution is temporarily to clear only those vars that are
known to be problematic and make csh possibly fail.  There only hap-
pens to be one of those at present, namely LS_COLORS.

=item Fixed error in error during global destruction

A SEGV in mess_sv during global destruction with a DEBUGGING perl and
-DS been fixed, occuring when we wanted to report the location of an
error when curcop has already been freed.

Testcase: C<./miniperl -DS -e '$_="f"; s/./"&".$&/ee'>

L<[perl #129027]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=129027>

=item Fixed ck_chift segfault

A SEGV in ck_shift with an empty/wrong current function, caused by a
syntax error has been fixed. The syntax error is now reported lateron.
Testcase: C<'qq{@{sub{q}}]]}}; s0{shift'>

L<[perl #125351]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=125351>

=item Handle missing Unicode heredoc terminators correctly

E.g. C<perl -CS -e 'use utf8; q«'>
prints now C<Can't find string terminator "«" anywhere before EOF at -e line 1.>

L<[perl #128701]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128701>

=item Syntax warnings with until ($x = 1) { ... }

C< until ($x = 1) { ... } > and C< ... until $x = 1 > now properly
warn when syntax warnings are enabled.
L<[perl #127333]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=127333>

=item Fixed require : parsing

C<require> followed by a single colon (as in C<foo() ? require : ...> is
now parsed correctly as C<require> with implicit C<$_>, rather than
C<require "">.
L<[perl #128307]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128307>

=back

=head1 Known Problems

For open cperl problems see L<[issues]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/>.

Some of these fixes also can to be backported from perl5.25.x upstream.

=over 4

=item *

The perl debugger doesn't yet work fully with signatures.
See e.g. L<[cperl #167]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/167>

=item *

F<t/op/taint.t> contained a test with signatures and 6 default
arguments, which on some 32 bit systems led to random "Reference
parameter cannot take default value at op/taint.t line 2461"
compile-time failures. This test has been rewritten to ony use 4 arguments.

See L<[cperl #164]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/164>

=item *

C<clang -flto=thin> and on some systems even C<gcc -flto> with C<-O3>
or C<-finline> leads to invisible symbols which were inlined and not
exported, even if they should be declared as public API. Work is
ongoing in the F<feature/gh186-lto-thin> branch, but there the
inlining is disabled by the C<used> attribute, leading to a
10% performance regression.  On the other hand a working
C<clang-3.9 -flto> leads to 20% performance improvements.

=item *

C< until ($x = 1) { ... } > and C< ... until $x = 1 > should
warn when syntax warnings are enabled.
L<[perl #127333]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=127333>

=item *

C< ${\vec %h, 0, 1} > and C< ${\substr %h, 0} > should not segfault, rather
the lvalue context should be propagated, and list context properly handled.
L<[perl #128260]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128260>

=back

=head1 Errata From Previous Releases

=over 4

=item *

Parsing bad POSIX charclasses no longer leaks memory.  This was fixed in Perl
5.25.2
L<[perl #128313]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128313>

=item *

Fixed issues with recursive regexes.  The behavior was fixed in Perl 5.24.0.
L<[perl #126182]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=126182>

=back

=head1 Obituary

Jon Portnoy (AVENJ), a prolific Perl author and admired Gentoo community
member, has passed away on August 10, 2016. He will be remembered and
missed by all those with which he came in contact and enriched with his
intellect, wit, and spirit.

=head1 Acknowledgements

cperl 5.26.0 represents approximately 1 year of development since Perl 5.24.2c
and contains approximately 420,000 lines of changes across 2,800 files from 75
authors.

Excluding auto-generated files, documentation and release tools, there were
approximately 260,000 lines of changes to 1,900 .pm, .t, .c and .h files.

The following people are known to have contributed the improvements
that became cperl 5.26.0:

Reini Urban, Karl Williamson, David Mitchell, Father Chrysostomos, Yves Orton,
Jarkko Hietaniemi, Aaron Crane, Tony Cook, Abigail, Dan Collins, Lukas Mai,
Craig A. Berry, James E Keenan, Hugo van der Sanden, Andy Lester, Dagfinn
Ilmari Mannsåker, Jim Cromie, Matthew Horsfall, Sawyer X, Aristotle Pagaltzis,
H.Merijn Brand, Daniel Dragan, Steve Hay, Niko Tyni, Pali, Zefram, Dominic
Hargreaves, Chris 'BinGOs' Williams, Renee Baecker, Ricardo Signes, E. Choroba,
Petr Písař, Steffen Müller, John Lightsey, Nicolas Rochelemagne, Karen
Etheridge, Shlomi Fish, Dave Rolsky, Smylers, Christian Hansen, Yaroslav
Kuzmin, Misty De Meo, Ævar Arnfjörð Bjarmason, Alex Vandiver, Stefan
Seifert, Tomasz Konojacki, James Raspass, Ed Avis, Steven Humphrey, Neil
Bowers, Rafael Garcia-Suarez, Theo Buehler, Thomas Sibley, Doug Bell, Jerry D.
Hedden, Samuel Thibault, Unicode Consortium, J. Nick Koston, Colin Newell,
Sergey Aleynikov, Leon Timmermans, Maxwell Carey, Christian Millour, Chase
Whitener, Pino Toscano, Peter Avalos, Salvador Fandiño, Dave Cross, Andrew
Fresh, Andreas Voegele, Hauke D, Rick Delaney, François Perrad, Richard
Levitte, vendethiel.

The list above is almost certainly incomplete as it is automatically generated
from version control history. In particular, it does not include the names of
the (very much appreciated) contributors who reported issues to the Perl bug
tracker.

Many of the changes included in this version originated in the CPAN modules
included in Perl's core. We're grateful to the entire CPAN community for
helping Perl to flourish.

For a more complete list of all of Perl's historical contributors, please see
the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source distribution.

Generated with:

    cperl Porting/acknowledgements.pl cperl-5.24.2..HEAD

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the articles recently
posted to the comp.lang.perl.misc newsgroup and the perl bug database at
L<https://rt.perl.org/> .  There may also be information at
L<http://www.perl.org/> , the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please run the L<perlbug> program
included with your release.  Be sure to trim your bug down to a tiny but
sufficient test case.  Your bug report, along with the output of C<perl -V>,
will be sent off to perlbug@perl.org to be analysed by the Perl porting team.

If you think it's a cperl specific bug or trust the cperl developers more 
please file an issue at L<https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues>.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications which make it
inappropriate to send to a publicly archived mailing list, then see
L<perlsec/SECURITY VULNERABILITY CONTACT INFORMATION>
For details of how to report the issue.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
