=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl5242cdelta - what is new for cperl v5.24.2

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes the differences between the cperl 5.24.1
and the cperl 5.24.2 releases.

=head1 Security

=head2 chdir heap-buffer-overflow

Fixed heap-buffer-overflow in chdir without argument. make chdir allocate the stack
it needs for the result, overwriting one stack entry. Note that the perl stack is on
the heap, so it's not that dramatic.
L<[perl #129130]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=129130>

=head2 Parse-CPAN-Meta security

Sets C<$YAML::XS::DisableCode>, C<$YAML::XS::DisableBlessed> while
parsing F<META.yml> files. See L<YAML::XS/"$YAML::XS::DisableBlessed">.

=head1 Deprecations

=head2 do_open, do_close macros

Those macros clash on darwin XTools with the system iostream
C<_OutputIterator> methods. We need to use the fullname
B<Perl_do_open> and B<Perl_do_close> functions whenever perl needs to be
embedded into C++ projects. Or the better C<do_openn> macro.

With the system C++ compiler on darwin C<do_open>, C<do_close> are now
undefined.  See L<[cperl #227]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/227>

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item App::Cpan 1.64_01

Fixed C<CPAN::Shell->expand("Module", "Bundle::...")> error with Bundles,
a regression from 1.63 and prev. cperl releases up to 5.25.0c.
cperl only.

=item Archive-Tar  2.18

Better 09_roundtrip.t tests.

=item base  1.23_01

revert base.pm incdot test change and fix properly

=item B  1.62_06

fix -Wc++11-compat

=item B-C  1.54_15

Fixed IsCOW savepvn, store the last cowrefcnt.

Fixed wrong savepvn length, failing with asan.

Optimized mro_isa_changed_in initialization.
Added B::HV::Gv_AMG method.

Fixes heap-buffer overflow at t/c.t 11 with asan.

Fixed -lcperl for shared libcperl.

=item Compress::Raw::Bzip2 2.069

Fixed APPEND_OUTPUT logic [RT #119005]

=item Compress::Raw::Zlib 2.069

Fixed APPEND_OUTPUT logic [RT #119007]

=item Config  6.22_01

add fake_signatures, --regen support, support for dev versions.

=item Config::Perl::V  0.27_01

=item CPAN::Meta  2.150010c

And merge F<cpan/Parse-CPAN-Meta> into it. F<cpan/Parse-CPAN-Meta> is
gone.

Parse-CPAN-Meta security: set $YAML::XS::DisableCode, $YAML::XS::DisableBlessed.

Add support for all known YAML and JSON modules: *::Syck, JSON::MaybeXS, Mojo::JSON.
But JSON::Any is broken.

fixed UTF-8 issues, passes now all Test-CPAN-Meta tests.

=item CPAN  2.14c

reapply most of our patches.
skip cperl builtin prereqs.

=item Cpanel-JSON-XS 3.0225

- Fixes for g++-6, stricter -fpermissive and -Wc++11-compat.

- Added tests for ill-formed utf8 sequences from Encode.

- modfl() mingw 4.0 runtime bug [perl #125924]

- Tested with the comprehensive JSON decode spectests from
  http://seriot.ch/parsing_json.html. Not added to core. #72

- decode with BOM: UTF-8, UTF-16, or UTF-32.

- fixed detection of final \0 as illegal non-whitespace garbage. Fixes
  spectest 'n_number_then_00'. #72

- warn with unicode noncharacters as in core when not in relaxed mode.
  #74

- fail decode of non-unicode raw characters above U+10FFFF
  when not in relaxed mode.

- added F<t/gh70-asan.t>

=item Data::Dumper  1.162

strEQc improvements

fix correct indentation for utf-8 key hash elements, [perl #128524].

=item Devel-NYTProf 6.04

Fix -Wc++11-compat warnings, and various minor issues.

=item Devel::PPPort  3.35_02

Fix -Wc++11-compat warnings.

=item Digest::SHA  5.96

prevented shasum from possibly running malicious code,
remove '.' from @INC before module loading RT #116513,
namespace cleanup (RT #105371 and #105372),
minor code and documentation tweaks

=item DynaLoader 2.06c

Fixed build dependency for F<dlboot.c>. No excessive rebuilds anymore.

=item Encode  2.88

various upstream fixes.
plus g++-6 -fpermissive and -Wc++11-compat fixes.
our local make -s silent patches and various others are now all upstream.

=item File::Fetch  2.52

* Set a cleaned env when running git clone
* Changed git repository link in tests
* Removed consistently failing httpbin.org tests
* Require Module::Load::Conditional 0.66
* Fix FTP tests for ipv6

=item Getopt::Long 2.49.1

* RT #114999 fix :number
* RT #113748 fix VersionMessage ignores -output argument
* RT #39052 sanify gnu_getopt

=item HTTP::Tiny  0.070

Many fixes und improvements

=item Internals-DumpArenas  0.12_05

Fix -Wc++11-compat warnings.
Print empty arrays and hashes as such.

=item IO-Socket-IP  0.38

- Support setting custom socket options with new Sockopts
  constructor parameter

- Restore blocking mode after ->connect errors [cpan #112334]

=item IPC::Cmd  0.96

set $Module::Load::Conditional::FORCE_SAFE_INC = 1

=item JSON::PP  2.27400_02

Fixed true/false redefinition warnings.

=item libnet  3.10

- Remove . from @INC when loading optional modules.  [Tony Cook, Perl
  RT#127834, CVE-2016-1238]

- Increased minimum required version of IO::Socket::IP to 0.25 to hopefully
  stop t/pop3_ipv6.t hanging.  [CPAN RT#104545]

- Debug output now includes decoded (from base64) negotiation for SASL.
  [Philip Prindeville, PR#27]

- plus the suse utf8 fixes for Net::Cmd, see 5bd7010cb and
  our darwin performance fix for hostname.

=item Locale-Codes 3.42

Added Czech republic aliases back in
Lot of new codes.

=item Locale::Maketext 1.28

Fix optional runtime load for CVE-2016-1238

Add blacklist and whitelist support, with 
perl #127923 priority. See L<Locale::Maketext/"BRACKET NOTATION SECURITY">

=item Math-BigInt  1.999726

with our t/ skip count fixes.

=item Module-Load-Conditional  0.68

Fix unconditional @INC localisation,
Add FORCE_SAFE_INC option to fix CVE-2016-1238.

=item Module-Metadata  1.000033

- Fix file operation in tests for VMS

- use a more strict matching heuristic when attempting to infer the
  "primary" module name in a parsed .pm file

- only report "main" as the module name if code was seen outside another
  namespace, fixing bad results for pod files (RT#107525)

=item Net-Ping 2.55

Fixed missing C<_unpack_sockaddr_in> family, which took AF_INET6 for
a AF_INET addr in F<t/500_ping_icmp.t> and F<t/500_ping_icmp_ttl.t>.
Use now a proper default. Detected by the new gitlab ci.

Fixed C<_pack_sockaddr_in> for a proper 2nd argument type, hash or packed
address.

Improved F<500_ping_icmp.t> to try C<sudo -n> (no prompt). [RT #118451]

Relaxed more tests failing with firewalled icmp on localhost. [RT #118441]

Fixed ping_external argument type, either packed ip or hostname.
[RT #113825]

Fixed wrong skip message in F<t/020_external.t>

=item NEXT  0.67

Doc and meta changes only.

=item parent  0.236

improved t/parent-pmc.t,
excluded new xt tests

=item Perl-OSType  1.010

Added msys

=item podlators  4.09

Many L<Pod::Man> bugfixes and new tests.
See L<https://metacpan.org/changes/distribution/podlators>

=item Pod-Perldoc  3.27

Fix broken test on Windows and FreeBSD (RT#116551)
Fix CVE-2016-1238 by temporarily removing '.' from @INC in world writable directories.
Fix =head3 appearing in some perlfunc lookups
AmigaOS patches (RT#106798) (RT#110368)
Fall back to an English perlfunc if translation doesn't exist (RT#104695)
FreeBSD has mandoc too, with UTF-8 support.
-U now documented and implied with -F (RT#87837)

=item Pod-HTML 2.22c

Improved parallel testing, relative F<testdir/test$$.lib>.
See L<[RT #118416]|https://rt.cpan.org/Ticket/Display.html?id=118416>.

=item Scalar-List-Utils  1.46_08

Fix -Wc++11-compat warnings.
Prepare for handling NUL in names for cperl-5.25.2

=item Socket  2.024_05

Fix -Wc++11-compat warnings.

=item Sys-Syslog  0.35

CVE-2016-1238: avoid loading optional modules from default . (Tony Cook).
Patch rewrote to no longer depend upon @INC.
See L<https://metacpan.org/changes/distribution/Sys-Syslog>

Kept our smoker logic in F<t/syslog.t>, for slow darwin systems,
the suse patch and disabled the lexical filehandle patch.

=item Term-ANSIColor 4.06

Add aliases ansi16 through ansi255 and on_ansi16 through on_ansi255
(plus the corresponding constants) for the grey and rgb colors so that
one can refer to all of the 256 ANSI colors with consistent names.
These are aliases; the colors returned by uncolor will still use the
grey and rgb names.  (#118267)

=item Term::ReadKey 2.37_01

ReadKey.pm renamed to ReadKey_pm.PL,
expand blockoptions specific variants already at installation,
no load-time eval, demand-load Carp, remove unneeded AutoLoader,
harmonize formatting.

patch: use faster StructCopy and fixup the XS.

improved blockoptions probe when dynaloading fails.

=item Thread-Semaphore  2.13

Added C<down_timed> method.

=item Time-HiRes  1.9741_01

merge with cpan 1.9741

Fix -Wc++11-compat warnings
Keep our better C++ fixes
Keep our t/usleep.t, t/alarm.t, t/utime.t fixes.
Keep our do_openn improvements in typemap.
Skip t/utime.t on ext2/ext3

from upstream:

- El Capitan compatibility
- use CLOCK_REALTIME for clock_nanosleep scan
- include file consistency in scans
- use clockid_t consistently
- use hv_fetchs()
- scan for clockid_t (needed for macos Sierra)
- darwin lacks clockid_t [rt.cpan.org #129789]

=item Time-Local  1.25

Less runtime memory: demand-load Carp, Config.
reformatted

=item Unicode-Collate 1.19

Many new locales. Some major fixes.

=item version  0.9917_02c

Merge latest version with the '_' lyon concensus with the cperl extension
of the optional final 'c' suffix. Extend version::regex for cperl.
Now also parse the 'c' natively.

=item YAML::XS  0.75

fixed encoding issues: fixed wrong $YAML::XS::Encoding and
$YAML::XS::LineBreak comparison logic.
fixed utf8 input as handled as UTF8,
non-utf8 honors $YAML::XS::Encoding.

fixed -Wunused value warnings

merged with upstream YAML-LibYAML,
implemented $DisableBlessed (security).

=back

=head1 Configuration and Compilation

=over 4

=item d_llabs

Probe for C<llabs()> needed for PERL_IABS on 32bit with -Duse64bitint,
the default on mingw/cygwin. Defines C<HAS_LLABS>.

=back

=head1 Testing

=over 4

=item *

Added F<t/porting/embedcpp.t> to check for perl.h C++ compatibility with a modern
C++ compiler. There must be no fatal compilation errors in the C<-c> step from
C++ incompatibilities in any header file.

This is related to the new C<-Wc++11-compat> and C<-fpermissive> fixes.

Note that Microsoft Visual C++ still throws errors. You cannot use that yet.
See L<[cperl #227]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/227>.

=back

=head1 Selected Bug Fixes

=over 4

=item *

Fixed the range unicode bug. When the right side of the range is a UTF-8 encoded
string, but the left side not, downgrade the right side to native octets.
E.g.

    my $r = chr 255; utf8::upgrade $r; my $num = ("a" .. $r);
    print $num

should print 26 but does 702, because the utf-8 repr. of C<\x{ff}>
is C<"\303\277" [UTF8 "\x{ff}"]>, and the range was incremented from
"a" to "\x{c3}\x{bf}" instead.
See L<[cperl #218]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/218>.

=item *

Fixed several issues with C<-Duseshrplib>, a shared F<libcperl.$so>:

install it (!!) (cperl only),
fix ExtUtils::Embed and B-C compilation and testing,
fix tests on darwin,
fix configuration probe of Term::ReadKey.

=item *

Fixed a cperl-only failure in signatures with default blocks introducing
a new lexical variable. As in C<sub t151($a,$b=do{my $f},$c=1){} t151($x,$x,$x)>.
This failure was only fatal on 32bit + -Duse64bitint systems.

C<SIGNATURE_arg_default_op> does not have a items arg.
See L<[cperl #164]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/164>.
and L<[cperl #213]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/213>.

=item *

v-strings with a 'c' suffix can now be parsed natively, in C<scan_vstring()>.
See L<[cperl #211]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/211>.

=back

=head1 Known Problems

For open cperl problems see L<[issues]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/>.

Some of these fixes also can to be backported from perl5.25.x upstream.

=over 4

=item *

C< until ($x = 1) { ... } > and C< ... until $x = 1 > should
warn when syntax warnings are enabled.
L<[perl #127333]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=127333>

=item *

C< ${\vec %h, 0, 1} > and C< ${\substr %h, 0} > should not segfault, rather
the lvalue context should be propagated, and list context properly handled.
L<[perl #128260]|https://rt.perl.org/Public/Bug/Display.html?id=128260>

=item *

The perl debugger doesn't yet work with signatures. It doesn't step into
such functions and it may fail.
See e.g. L<[cperl #167]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/167>

=item *

C<clang -flto=thin> and on some systems even C<gcc -flto> with C<-O3>
or C<-finline> leads to invisible symbols which were inlined and not
exported, even if they should be declared as public API. This is fixed
in v5.25.2c.

=back

=head1 Acknowledgements

Perl 5.24.2 represents approximately 2 months of development since Perl 5.24.1c
and contains approximately 170,000 lines of changes across 720 files from 4
authors.

Excluding auto-generated files, documentation and release tools, there were
approximately 93,000 lines of changes to 420 .pm, .t, .c and .h files.

The following people are known to have contributed the improvements
that became Perl 5.24.2:

Reini Urban, Tony Cook, Yves Orton, Hugo van der Sanden.

The list above is almost certainly incomplete as it is automatically generated
from version control history. In particular, it does not include the names of
the (very much appreciated) contributors who reported issues to the Perl bug
tracker.

Many of the changes included in this version originated in the CPAN modules
included in Perl's core. We're grateful to the entire CPAN community for
helping Perl to flourish.

For a more complete list of all of Perl's historical contributors, please see
the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source distribution.

Generated with:

    cperl Porting/acknowledgements.pl cperl-5.24.1..HEAD

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the articles recently
posted to the comp.lang.perl.misc newsgroup and the perl bug database at
L<https://rt.perl.org/> .  There may also be information at
L<http://www.perl.org/> , the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please run the L<perlbug> program
included with your release.  Be sure to trim your bug down to a tiny but
sufficient test case.  Your bug report, along with the output of C<perl -V>,
will be sent off to perlbug@perl.org to be analysed by the Perl porting team.

If you think it's a cperl specific bug or trust the cperl developers
more please file an issue at
L<https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues>.  The p5p bug tracker is
explicitly blocked for cperl developers, so we cannot see it there
until it is fixed, which might need several years.  p5p ignores any
cperl bugfixes, so you might want to report it twice.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications which make it
inappropriate to send to a publicly archived mailing list, then see
L<perlsec/SECURITY VULNERABILITY CONTACT INFORMATION>
For details of how to report the issue.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
