=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl5291cdelta - what is new for cperl v5.29.1

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the cperl 5.29.1 and the cperl
5.29.0 release.

If you are upgrading from an earlier release such as v5.28.1c, first read
L<perl5290cdelta>, which describes differences between v5.28.1c and v5.29.0c.

=head1 Security

=head2 [CVE-2018-18311] Integer overflow leading to buffer overflow and segmentation fault

Integer arithmetic in C<Perl_my_setenv()> could wrap when the combined length
of the environment variable name and value exceeded around 0x7fffffff.  This
could lead to writing beyond the end of an allocated buffer with attacker
supplied data.

L<[perl #133204]|https://rt.perl.org/Ticket/Display.html?id=133204>

=head2 Restrict my_setenv to ARG_MAX

perl5 fixed C<Perl_my_setenv()> by allowing C<%ENV> sizes larger than
C<ARG_MAX> (typically 128Kb), up to 2GB. This is considered a security
risk. It writes onto the kernel stack, even if often caught by MAXEXECARGS
"Argument list too long" kernel errors on the next exec call.
cperl disallows C<%ENV> larger than the sysconf(_SC_ARG_MAX)/MAX_ARG_STRLEN/
ARG_MAX/NCARGS size with a new L<perldiag/"Environment size %d larger than the allowed %d">
error.

=head1 Performance Enhancements

=over 4

=item *

Optimized the static link order of objects for the default case,
when you cannot use lto, pgo, autofdo nor bolt.
Added lto to the default ccflags.
See L<http://perl11.org/blog/bolt.html> and
L<[cperl #381]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/381>.
cperl-only.

=back

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

The list of new and updated modules is modified automatically as part of
preparing a Perl release, so the only reason to manually add entries here is if
you're summarising the important changes in the module update. (Also, if the
manually-added details don't match the automatically-generated ones, the
release manager will have to investigate the situation carefully.)

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item L<B::C> 1.55_10

Better mconcat support. Fix some XS memory leaks.

Add missing optimize flags to F<cc_harness>, F<TestBC.pm> and F<perlcc>,
required for C<-flto>.

When testing overly large C files > 50k (with modules), apply cc -O1,
not -O2 or -O3.

Honor and set SKIP_SLOW_TESTS, set with C<-flto>. Applied to all tests
with large C files. t/c*.t now only execute 13 tests under
-flto/SKIP_SLOW_TESTS and CI, because they may not be finished in
under 10min.

Added a C<is_CI()> test detection.

=item L<Cpanel::JSON::XS> 4.09

Silence Gconvert -Wunused-result.

Add unblessed_bool property (PR #118 by Pali)

Add seperate allow_dupkeys property, in relaxed (#122),
Fixed allow_dupkeys for the XS slow path,
Silence 2 -Wunused-value warnings,
Fix ->unblessed_bool to produce modifiable perl structures (PR #121 by Pali).

=item L<ExtUtils::Embed> 1.36

Added optimize to ccopts, required for C<-flto>.
Fixed documentation of ccopts.
Fixed test to use ccopts, include local -I.., indentation,
remove wrong -O hack.
cperl-only.

=item L<ExtUtils::MakeMaker> 8.35_07

Added C<-flto> support for static libs (need the lto plugin) and D for
deterministic builds, using arflags for AR_STATIC_ARGS, not just 'cr'.
cperl-only.

=item L<Win32> 0.52_02

Fix various -Wunused warnings, added () usage croaks.
Fixed a -Warray-bounds buffer overflow in LONGPATH,
and two -Wmaybe-uninitialized.
cperl-only.

=back

=head1 Documentation

=head2 Changes to Existing Documentation

We have attempted to update the documentation to reflect the changes
listed in this document.  If you find any we have missed, send email
to L<perlbug@perl.org|mailto:perlbug@perl.org>.

Additionally, the following selected changes have been made:

=head3 L<perlhacktips>

=over 4

=item *

Added a L<perlhacktips/COMPILER OPTIMIZATIONS> section, with LTO, PGO,
AutoFDO, prelink and BOLT tips.
cperl-only.

=back

=head1 Configuration and Compilation

=over 4

=item *

Without C<DEBUGGING> the best C<-flto> Link Time Optimization flag is
now added to the default ccflags.
See L<http://perl11.org/blog/bolt.html> and
L<[cperl #381]|https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues/381>.

The correct -flto= variant is then used for ldflags and lddlflags also.
cldflags contains now also the optimize settings, needed for -flto.

ar is replaced by llvm-ar-$ver if needed.
All cperl-only.

=item *

C<ccname> is now set to "clang" for clang, not "gcc".

=item *

On linux "icc" is also set for C<ccname>, and C<-O3> is preferred over
C<-O2> in most non-DEBUGGING cases with newer compilers.
cperl-only.

=item *

C<llvmversion> string added, like "6.0.1-9.1 (tags/RELEASE_601/final)",
analog to C<gccversion>. With clang both variables are set.
cperl-only.

=item *

Added C<llvmsuffix> config, for bitcode-enabled ar, ranlib,
llvm-profdata. cperl-only.

=item *

Added C<ar --plugin> path to the gcc F<lto_plugin>, required for
binutils C<ar> with static libs with C<-flto>. Esp. on cygwin.
Ditto for C<ranlib>. cperl-only.

=item *

Added clang and useshrplib support for the two .autofdo targets.
See L<perlhacktips/AutoFDO>. cperl-only.

=item *

Added two .pgo targets, analog to autofdo. See L<perlhacktips/PGO>.
cperl-only.

=item *

Fix forgotten C<ffi_target> XSConfig key. (bug introduced in 5.29.0c)
cperl-only.

=item *

Set C<archname> and the target triple C<myarchname> earlier, right
after osname. cperl-only.

=item *

With C<-Uinstallmandirs> all four variables C<installman1dir>,
C<installman3dir>, C<installsiteman1dir> and C<installsiteman3dir> are set to
none, skipping installing all man pages. cperl-only.

=back

=head1 Testing

Tests were added and changed to reflect the other additions and
changes in this release.  Furthermore, these significant changes were
made:

=over 4

=item *

Added C<is_CI> detection function to F<t/TEST>.
cperl-only.

=item *

Honor more B<SKIP_SLOW_TESTS>, esp. with B-C, esp. with C<-flto>.
Document all used ENV vars in F<t/harness>.
cperl-only.

=back

=head1 Platform Support

=head2 Platform-Specific Notes

=over 4

=item cygwin

Fixed C<boot_Win32CORE> prototype to skip dllexport, fatal with C<-flto>.

Fixed ar for F<Win32CORE.a> by using the gcc liblto plugin.

Skip probing for C<-flto> on cygwin. This reliably fails to find a
proper image-base with that many new symbols, the adress space is just
too small:
C<Invalid relocation. Offset 0x.. at address 0x.. doesn't fit into 32 bits>

All cperl-only.

=back

=head1 Internal Changes

=over 4

=item *

Enabled USE_REENTRANT_API with threads by default on all platforms. See F<reentr.c>.
Previously it was only enabled by default on darwin.
cperl-only.

=back

=head1 Testing

=over 4

=item *

Added F<t/run/envsize.t> for L</Restrict my_setenv to ARG_MAX>

=back

=head1 Selected Bug Fixes

=over 4

=item *

Made the C<gmtime_r> and C<localtime_r> fallbacks thread-safe.

=back

=head1 Acknowledgements

cperl 5.29.1 represents approximately 5 months of development since cperl
5.29.0c and contains approximately 15,000 lines of changes across 140 files
from 4 authors.

Excluding auto-generated files, documentation and release tools, there were
approximately 1,200 lines of changes to 52 .pm, .t, .c and .h files.

The following people are known to have contributed the improvements that
became cperl 5.29.1:

Reini Urban, David Mitchell, Dominic Hargreaves, Karl Williamson.

The list above is almost certainly incomplete as it is automatically
generated from version control history including the perl and cperl repos.
In particular, it does not include the names of the (very much appreciated)
contributors who reported issues to the Perl bug tracker and the cperl
github issues.

Many of the changes included in this version originated in the CPAN modules
included in Perl's core. We're grateful to the entire CPAN community for
helping Perl to flourish.

For a more complete list of all of Perl's historical contributors, please
see the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source distribution.

Generated with:

    cperl Porting/acknowledgements.pl cperl-5.29.0..HEAD -c

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the perl bug database
at L<https://rt.perl.org/> .  There may also be information at
L<http://www.perl.org/> , the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please run the L<cperlbug> program
included with your release.  Be sure to trim your bug down to a tiny but
sufficient test case.  Your bug report, along with the output of C<perl -V>,
will be sent off to perlbug@perl.org to be analysed by the Perl porting team.

If you think it's a cperl specific bug or trust the cperl developers more
please file an issue at L<https://github.com/perl11/cperl/issues>.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications which make it
inappropriate to send to a publicly archived mailing list, then see
L<perlsec/SECURITY VULNERABILITY CONTACT INFORMATION>
For details of how to report the issue.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
